---
title : "13.09 — Overloading the subscript operator"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - the subscript operator
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---


When working with arrays, we typically use the subscript operator (`[]`) to index specific elements of an array:

```c++
// put the value 7 in the first element of the array
myArray[0] = 7; 
```

However, consider the following `IntList` class, which has a member variable that is an array:

```c++
class IntList {
private:
    int m_list[10]{};
};

int main() {
    IntList list{};
    // how do we access elements from m_list?
}
```

Because the `m_list` member variable is private, we can not access it directly from variable list. This means we have no way to directly get or set values in the `m_list` array. So how do we get or put elements into our list?

Without operator overloading, the typical method would be to create access functions:

```c++
class IntList {
private:
    int m_list[10]{};

public:
    void setItem(int index, int value) { m_list[index] = value; }
    int getItem(int index) const { return m_list[index]; }
};
```

While this works, it’s not particularly user friendly. Consider the following example:

```c++
int main() {
    IntList list{};
    list.setItem(2, 3);
}
```

Are we setting element 2 to the value 3, or element 3 to the value 2? Without seeing the definition of `setItem()`, it’s simply not clear.

You could also just return the entire list and use `operator[]` to access the element:

```c++
class IntList {
private:
    int m_list[10]{};

public:
    int* getList() { return m_list; }
};
```

While this also works, it’s syntactically odd:

```c++
int main() {
    IntList list{};
    list.getList()[2] = 3;
}
```


## Overloading `operator[]`

However, a better solution in this case is to overload the subscript operator (`[]`) to allow access to the elements of `m_list`. The subscript operator is one of the operators that `must` be overloaded as a member function. An overloaded `operator[]` function will always take one parameter: the subscript that the user places between the hard braces. In our `IntList` case, we expect the user to pass in an integer index, and we’ll return an integer value back as a result.

```c++
class IntList {
private:
    int m_list[10]{};

public:
    int& operator[] (int index);
};

int& IntList::operator[] (int index) {
    return m_list[index];
}
```

Now, whenever we use the subscript operator (`[]`) on an object of our class, the compiler will return the corresponding element from the `m_list` member variable! This allows us to both get and set values of `m_list` directly:

```c++
IntList list{};
list[2] = 3;                    // set a value
std::cout << list[2] << '\n';   // get a value
```

This is both easy syntactically and from a comprehension standpoint. When `list[2]` evaluates, the compiler first checks to see if there’s an overloaded `operator[]` function. If so, it passes the value inside the hard braces (in this case, 2) as an argument to the function.

Note that although you can provide a default value for the function parameter, actually using `operator[]` without a subscript inside is not considered a valid syntax, so there’s no point.

>**Tip**  
`C++23` will add support for overloading operator[] with multiple subscripts.


### Why `operator[]` returns a reference

Let’s take a closer look at how `list[2] = 3` evaluates. Because the subscript operator has a higher precedence than the assignment operator, `list[2]` evaluates first. `list[2]` calls `operator[]`, which we’ve defined to return a reference to `list.m_list[2]`. Because `operator[]` is returning a reference, it returns the actual `list.m_list[2]` array element. Our partially evaluated expression becomes `list.m_list[2] = 3`, which is a straightforward integer assignment.

In [lesson 1.3 -- Introduction to objects and variables](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-objects-and-variables/), you learned that any value on the left hand side of an assignment statement *must* be an l-value (which is a variable that has an actual memory address). Because the result of `operator[]` can be used on the left hand side of an assignment (e.g. `list[2] = 3`), the return value of `operator[]` *must* be an l-value. As it turns out, **references are *always* l-values**, because you can only take a reference of variables that have memory addresses. So by returning a reference, the compiler is satisfied that we are returning an l-value.

Consider what would happen if `operator[]` returned an integer by value instead of by reference. `list[2]` would call `operator[]`, which would return the value of `list.m_list[2]`. For example, if `m_list[2]` had the value of `6`, `operator[]` would return the value `6`. `list[2] = 3` would partially evaluate to `6 = 3`, which makes no sense! If you try to do this, the C++ compiler will complain:

```
C:VCProjectsTest.cpp(386) : error C2106: '=' : left operand must be l-value
```


### Dealing with const objects

In the above `IntList` example, `operator[]` is non-const, and we can use it as an l-value to change the state of non-const objects. However, what if our `IntList` object was const? In this case, we wouldn’t be able to call the non-const version of `operator[]` because that would allow us to potentially change the state of a const object.

The good news is that we can define a *non-const* and a *const* version of `operator[]` separately. The non-const version will be used with non-const objects, and the const version with const-objects.

```c++
#include <iostream>

class IntList {
private:
    // give this class some initial state for this example
    int m_list[10]{ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 }; 

public:
    int& operator[] (int index);
    const int& operator[] (int index) const;
};

// for non-const objects: can be used for assignment
int& IntList::operator[] (int index) { 
    return m_list[index];
}

// for const objects: can only be used for access
const int& IntList::operator[] (int index) const { 
    return m_list[index];
}

int main() {
    IntList list{};

    // okay: calls non-const version of operator[]
    list[2] = 3; 
    std::cout << list[2] << '\n';

    const IntList clist{};

    // compile error! Calls const version of operator[],
    // which returns a const reference. Cannot assign to this.
    clist[2] = 3; 
    std::cout << clist[2] << '\n';
}
```

If we comment out the line `clist[2] = 3`, the above program compiles and executes as expected.


### Error checking

One other advantage of overloading the subscript operator is that we can make it safer than accessing arrays directly. Normally, when accessing arrays, the subscript operator does not check whether the index is valid. For example, the compiler will not complain about the following code:

```c++
int list[5]{};
list[7] = 3; // index 7 is out of bounds!
```

However, if we know the size of our array, we can make our overloaded subscript operator check to ensure the index is within bounds:

```c++
#include <cassert>  // for assert()
#include <array>    // for std::size()

class IntList {
private:
    int m_list[10]{};

public:
    int& operator[] (int index);
};

int& IntList::operator[] (int index) {
    assert(index >= 0 && index < std::size(m_list));

    return m_list[index];
}
```

In the above example, we have used the `assert()` function (included in the `cassert` header) to make sure our index is valid. If the expression inside the assert evaluates to false (which means the user passed in an invalid index), the program will terminate with an error message, which is much better than the alternative (corrupting memory). This is probably the most common method of doing error checking of this sort.


### Pointers to objects and overloaded `operator[]` don’t mix

If you try to call `operator[]` on a pointer to an object, C++ will assume you’re trying to index an array of objects of that type.

Consider the following example:

```c++
#include <cassert>  // for assert()
#include <array>    // for std::size()

class IntList {
private:
    int m_list[10]{};

public:
    int& operator[] (int index);
};

int& IntList::operator[] (int index) {
    assert(index >= 0 && index < std::size(m_list));

    return m_list[index];
}

int main() {
    IntList* list{ new IntList{} };
    
    // error: this will assume we're accessing index 2 of an array of IntLists
    list [2] = 3; 

    delete list;
}
```

Because we can’t assign an integer to an `IntList`, this won’t compile. However, if assigning an integer was valid, this would compile and run, with undefined results.

>**Rule**  
Make sure you’re not trying to call an overloaded `operator[]` on a pointer to an object.

The proper syntax would be to dereference the pointer first (making sure to use parenthesis since `operator[]` has higher precedence than `operator*`), then call `operator[]`:

```c++
int main() {
    IntList* list{ new IntList{} };

    // get our IntList object, then call overloaded operator[]
    (*list)[2] = 3; 

    delete list;
}
```

This is ugly and error prone. Better yet, don’t set pointers to your objects if you don’t have to.


### The function parameter does not need to be an integer

As mentioned above, C++ passes what the user types between the hard braces as an argument to the overloaded function. In most cases, this will be an integer value. However, this is not required -- and in fact, you can define that your overloaded `operator[]` take a value of any type you desire. You could define your overloaded `operator[]` to take a `double`, a `std::string`, or whatever else you like.

As a ridiculous example, just so you can see that it works:

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

class Stupid {
private:

public:
    void operator[] (const std::string& index);
};

// It doesn't make sense to overload operator[] to print something.
// But it is the easiest way to show that
// the function parameter can be a non-integer.
void Stupid::operator[] (const std::string& index) {
    std::cout << index;
}

int main() {
    Stupid stupid{};
    stupid["Hello, world!"];    // "Hello, world!"
}
```

Overloading `operator[]` to take a `std::string` parameter can be useful when writing certain kinds of classes, such as those that use words as indices.


## Conclusion

The subscript operator is typically overloaded to provide direct access to individual elements from an array (or other similar structure) contained within a class. Because strings are often implemented as arrays of characters, `operator[]` is often implemented in string classes to allow the user to access a single character of the string.


## Quiz time


### Question #1

```c++
#include <algorithm>
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <vector>

struct StudentGrade {
    std::string name{};
    char grade{};
};

class GradeMap {
private:
    std::vector<StudentGrade> m_map{};

public:
    char& operator[](const std::string& name);
};

char& GradeMap::operator[](const std::string& name) {
    auto found{ std::find_if(m_map.begin(), m_map.end(),
        [&](const auto& student) { // this is a lambda
            return (student.name == name);
        }) };

    if (found != m_map.end())
        return found->grade;

    // otherwise create a new StudentGrade for this student and
    // add it to the end of our vector.
    m_map.push_back({ name });

    // and return the element
    return m_map.back().grade;
}

int main() {
    GradeMap grades{};

    grades["Joe"] = 'A';
    grades["Frank"] = 'B';

    std::cout << "Joe has a grade of " << grades["Joe"] << '\n';
    std::cout << "Frank has a grade of " << grades["Frank"] << '\n';
}
```

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <map> // std::map
#include <string>

int main() {
    // std::map can be initialized
    std::map<std::string, char> grades{
        { "Joe", 'A' },
        { "Frank", 'B' }
    };

    // and assigned
    grades["Susan"] = 'C';
    grades["Tom"] = 'D';

    std::cout << "Joe has a grade of " << grades["Joe"] << '\n';
    std::cout << "Frank has a grade of " << grades["Frank"] << '\n';
}
```


### Question #2

**Q.** Extra credit #1: The `GradeMap` class and sample program we wrote is inefficient for many reasons. Describe one way that the `GradeMap` class could be improved.

**A.** `std::vector` is unsorted by nature. This means every time we call `operator[]`, we’re potentially traversing the entire `std::vector` to find our element. With a few elements, this isn’t a problem, but as we continue to add names, this will become increasingly slow. We could optimize this by keeping our `m_map` sorted and using a binary search, so we minimize the number of elements we have to look through to find the ones we’re interested in.


### Question #3

**Q.** Extra credit #2: Why does this program potentially not work as expected?

```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    GradeMap grades{};

    char& gradeJoe{ grades["Joe"] }; // does a push_back
    gradeJoe = 'A';

    char& gradeFrank{ grades["Frank"] }; // does a push_back
    gradeFrank = 'B';

    std::cout << "Joe has a grade of " << gradeJoe << '\n';
    std::cout << "Frank has a grade of " << gradeFrank << '\n';
}
```

**A.** When `Frank` is added, the `std::vector` may need to grow to hold it. This requires dynamically allocating a new block of memory, copying the elements in the array to that new block, and deleting the old block. When this happens, any references to existing elements in the `std::vector` are invalidated (meaning they are left as dangling references to deleted memory).

In other words, after we `push_back("Frank")`, if the `std::vector` had to grow to make room for Frank, the `gradeJoe` reference would be invalidated. Accessing `gradeJoe` to print Joe’s grade would then lead to undefined results.

***How a `std::vector` grows is a compiler-specific detail***, so we can expect the above program to work fine when compiled with some compilers and not others.