---
title : "08.04 — Arithmetic conversions"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - the usual arithmetic conversions
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
last_modified_at: 2022-04-27
---


In [lesson 5.1 -- Operator precedence and associativity](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/operator-precedence-and-associativity/), we discussed how expressions are evaluated according to the precedence and associativity of their operators.

Consider the following expression:

```c++
int x{ 2 + 3 };
```

When binary operator`+` is invoked, it is given two operands, both of type `int`. Because both operands are of the same type, that type will be used to perform the calculation and to return the result. Thus, `2 + 3` will evaluate to `int` value `5`.

But what happens when the operands of a binary operator are of different types?

```c++
??? y{ 2 + 3.5 };
```

In this case, `operator+` is being given one operand of type `int` and another of type `double`. Should the result of the operator be returned as an `int`, a `double`, or possibly something else altogether? When defining a variable, we can choose what type it has. In other cases, for example when using `std::cout <<`, the type the calculation evaluates to changes the behavior of what it output.

In C++, certain operators require that their operands be of the same type. If one of these operators is invoked with operands of different types, *one or both of the operands will be implicitly converted to matching types* using a set of rules called **the usual arithmetic conversions**.


## The operators that require operands of the same type

**The following operators require their operands to be of the same type:**

- The binary arithmetic operators: `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`
- The binary relational operators: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`, `==`, `!=`
- The binary bitwise arithmetic operators: `&`, `^`, `|`
- The conditional operator `?:` (excluding the condition, which is expected to be of type `bool`)


## The usual arithmetic conversion rules

The usual arithmetic conversion rules are pretty simple. The compiler has a prioritized list of types that looks something like this:

- long double (highest)
- double
- float
- unsigned long long
- long long
- unsigned long
- long
- unsigned int
- int (lowest)

**There are only two rules:**

- If the type of at least one of the operands is on the priority list, the operand with lower priority is converted to the type of the operand with higher priority.
- Otherwise (the type of neither operand is on the list), both operands are numerically promoted (see [8.2 -- Floating-point and integral promotion](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/floating-point-and-integral-promotion/)).


## Some examples

In the following examples, we’ll use the `typeid` operator (included in the `<typeinfo>` header), to show the resulting type of an expression.

First, let’s add an `int` and a `double`:

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <typeinfo> // for typeid()

int main() {
    int i{ 2 };
    double d{ 3.5 };

    // show us the type of i + d
    std::cout << typeid(i + d).name() << ' ' << i + d << '\n'; 
    // "double 5.5"
}
```

In this case, the `double` operand has the highest priority, so the lower priority operand (of type `int`) is type converted to double value `2.0`. Then `double` values `2.0` and `3.5` are added to produce double result `5.5`.

Note that your compiler may display something slightly different, **as the output of `typeid.name()` is left up to the compiler**.

Now let’s add two values of type `short`:

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <typeinfo> // for typeid()

int main() {
    short a{ 4 };
    short b{ 5 };

    // show us the type of a + b
    std::cout << typeid(a + b).name() << ' ' << a + b << '\n'; 
    // "int 9"
}
```

**Because neither operand appears on the priority list, both operands undergo integral promotion to type `int`.** The result of adding two `int`s is an `int`, as you would expect.


## Signed and unsigned issues

**This prioritization hierarchy can cause some problematic issues when mixing signed and unsigned values.** For example, take a look at the following code:

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <typeinfo> // for typeid()

int main() {

    // 5u means treat 5 as an unsigned integer
    std::cout << typeid(5u - 10).name() << ' ' << 5u - 10; 
    // "unsigned int 4294967291"
}
```

You might expect the expression `5u - 10` to evaluate to `-5` since `5 - 10 = -5`. But here’s what actually results.

Because the `unsigned int` operand has higher priority, the `int` operand is converted to an `unsigned int`. And since the value `-5` is out of range of an `unsigned int`, we get a result we don’t expect.

Here’s another example showing a counterintuitive result:

```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() { std::cout << std::boolalpha << (-3 < 5u); }
```

While it’s clear to us that `5` is greater than `-3`, when this expression evaluates, `-3` is converted to a large `unsigned int` that is larger than `5`. Thus, the above prints `false` rather than the expected result of `true`.

**This is one of the primary reasons to avoid unsigned integers** -- *when you mix them with signed integers in arithmetic expressions, you’re at risk for unexpected results. And the compiler probably won’t even issue a warning.*