---
title : "08.07 — Type deduction for objects using the auto keyword"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - type deduction, type inference
    - 
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---


There’s a subtle redundancy lurking in this simple variable definition:

```c++
double d{ 5.0 };
```

Because C++ is a strongly-typed language, we are required to provide an explicit type for all objects. Thus, we’ve specified that variable `d` is of type `double`.

However, the literal value `5.0` used to initialize `d` also has type `double` (implicitly determined via the format of the literal).

>**Related content**  
We discuss how literal types are determined in [lesson 4.14 -- Literals](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/literals/).

In cases where we want a variable and its initializer to have the same type, we’re effectively providing the same type information twice.


## Type deduction for initialized variables

**Type deduction** (also sometimes called **type inference**) is a feature that allows the compiler to deduce the type of an object from the object’s initializer. To use type deduction, the `auto` keyword is used in place of the variable’s type:

```c++
int main() {
    auto d{ 5.0 };      // 5.0 is a double literal, so d will be type double
    auto i{ 1 + 2 };    // 1 + 2 evaluates to an int, so i will be type int
    auto x{ i };        // i is an int, so x will be type int too
}
```

In the first case, because `5.0` is a `double` literal, the compiler will deduce that variable `d` should be of type `double`. In the second case, the expression `1 + 2` yields an `int` result, so variable `i` will be of type `int`. In the third case, `i` was previously deduced to be of type `int`, so `x` will also be deduced to be of type `int`.

Because function calls are valid expressions, we can even use type deduction when our initializer is a function call:

```c++
int add(int x, int y) {
    return x + y;
}

int main() {
    // add() returns an int, so sum's type will be deduced to int
    auto sum { add(5, 6) }; 
}
```

The `add()` function returns an `int` value, so the compiler will deduce that variable sum should have type `int`.

Type deduction will not work for objects that do not have initializers or empty initializers. Thus, the following is not valid:

```c++
int main() {
    auto x;     // The compiler is unable to deduce the type of x
    auto y{ };  // The compiler is unable to deduce the type of y
}
```

Although using type deduction for fundamental data types only saves a few (if any) keystrokes, in future lessons we will see examples where the types get complex and lengthy (and in some cases, can be hard to figure out). In those cases, using `auto` can save a lot of typing (and typos).


## Type deduction drops `const` qualifiers

In most cases, type deduction will drop the `const` qualifier from deduced types. For example:

```c++
int main() {
    const int x { 5 }; // x has type const int
    auto y { x };      // y will be type int (const is dropped)
}
```

In the above example, `x` has type `const int`, but when deducing a type for variable `y` using `x` as the initializer, type deduction deduces the type as `int`, not `const int`.

If you want a deduced type to be `const`, you must supply the `const` yourself. To do so, simply use the `const` keyword in conjunction with the `auto` keyword:

```c++
int main() {
    const int x { 5 };  // x has type const int
    const auto y { x }; // y will be type const int
}
```

In this example, the type deduced from `x` will be `int` (the const is `dropped`), but because we’ve re-added a `const` qualifier during the definition of variable `y`, variable `y` will be a `const int`.

**Type deduction will *not* drop the `const` qualifier for pointers to `const` values**, such as types deduced from C-style string literals.


## Type deduction drops references

Type deduction will also drop references.

For example, if you use type deduction with an initializer of type `int&`, the deduced type will be “`int`”, not “`int&`”.

```c++
int x{ 5 };     // x is a normal int
int& y{ x };    // y is an int& reference
auto z{ y };    // z will be an "int", not an "int &"
                // because references are dropped.
```

You can ensure a deduced type is a reference type by using `auto&` instead of `auto`.

```c++
int x{ 5 };     // x is a normal int.
auto& y{ x };   // Type deduced is "int",
                // but we've provided an &,
                // so y will be an "int&" reference.
```

You can also deduce a const reference by using `const auto&`


## Type deduction benefits and downsides

Type deduction is not only convenient, but also has a number of other benefits.

- First, if two or more variables are defined on sequential lines, the names of the variables will be lined up, helping to increase readability:

    ```c++
    // harder to read
    int a { 5 };
    double b { 6.7 };

    // easier to read
    auto c { 5 };
    auto d { 6.7 };
    ```

- Second, type deduction *only* works on variables that have initializers, so if you are in the habit of using type deduction, it can help avoid unintentionally uninitialized variables:

    ```c++
    int x;  // Oops, we forgot to initialize x,
            // but the compiler may not complain.
    auto y; // The compiler will error out
            // because it can't deduce a type for y.
    ```

- Third, you are guaranteed that there will be *no* unintended performance-impacting conversions:

    ```c++
    double x { 5 }; // bad:  Implicitly converts 5 from an int to a double.
    auto y { 5 };   // good: y is an int (hopefully that's what you wanted)
                    //       and no conversion takes place.
    ```

Type deduction also has a few downsides.

- First, type deduction obscures an object’s type information in the code. Although a good IDE should be able to show you the deduced type (e.g. when hovering a variable), it’s still a bit easier to make type-based mistakes when using type deduction.

    For example:

    ```c++
    auto y { 5 };   // Oops, we wanted a double here
                    // but we accidentally provided an int literal.
    ```

    In the above code, if we’d explicitly specified `y` as type `double`, `y` would have been a `double` even though we accidentally provided an `int` literal initializer. With type deduction, `y` will be deduced to be of type `int`.

    Here’s another example:

    ```c++
    #include <iostream>

    int main() {
        auto x { 3 };
        auto y { 2 };

        // Oops, we wanted floating point division here.
        std::cout << x / y; 
    }
    ```

    In this example, it’s less clear that we’re getting an integer division rather than a floating-point division.

- Second, if the type of an initializer changes, the type of a variable using type deduction will also change, perhaps unexpectedly. Consider:

    ```c++
    auto sum { add(5, 6) + gravity };
    ```

    If the return type of add changes from `int` to `double`, or gravity changes from `int` to `double`, sum will also change types from `int` to `double`.

- Third, because type deduction drops references, if you use “`auto`” when you should be using “`auto&`”, your code may not perform as well, or may even not work correctly.

Overall, the modern consensus is that type deduction is generally safe to use for objects, and that doing so can help make your code more readable by de-emphasizing type information so the logic of your code stands out better.

>**Best practice**  
Use type deduction for your variables, unless you need to commit to a specific type.

>**Author’s note**  
In future lessons, we’ll continue to use explicit types instead of type deduction when we feel showing the type information is helpful to understanding a concept or example.