---
title : "08.03 — Numeric conversions"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - narrowing conversion
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---


In the previous lesson ([8.2 -- Floating-point and integral promotion](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/floating-point-and-integral-promotion/)), we covered numeric promotions, which are conversions of specific narrower numeric types to wider numeric types (typically `int` or `double`) that can be processed efficiently.

C++ supports another category of numeric type conversions, called numeric conversions, that cover additional type conversions not covered by the numeric promotion rules.

>**Key insight**  
Any type conversion covered by the numeric promotion rules ([8.2 -- Floating-point and integral promotion](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/floating-point-and-integral-promotion/)) is a numeric promotion, not a numeric conversion.

There are five basic types of numeric conversions.

- Converting an integral type to any other integral type (excluding integral promotions):

    ```c++
    short s = 3;    // convert int to short
    long l = 3;     // convert int to long
    char ch = s;    // convert short to char
    ```

- Converting a floating point type to any other floating point type (excluding floating point promotions):

    ```c++
    float f = 3.0;          // convert double to float
    long double ld = 3.0;   // convert double to long double
    ```

- Converting a floating point type to any integral type:

    ```c++
    int i = 3.5;    // convert double to int
    ```

- Converting an integral type to any floating point type:

    ```c++
    double d = 3;   // convert int to double
    ```

- Converting an integral type or a floating point type to a bool:

    ```c++
    bool b1 = 3;    // convert int to bool
    bool b2 = 3.0;  // convert double to bool
    ```

>**As an aside…**  
Because brace initialization disallows some numeric conversions (more on this in a moment), we use copy initialization in this lesson (which does not have any such limitations) in order to keep the examples simple.


## Narrowing conversions

Unlike a numeric promotion (which is always safe), a numeric conversion may (or may not) result in the loss of data or precision.

Some numeric conversions are always safe (such as `int` to `long`, or `int` to `double`). Other numeric conversions, such as `double` to `int`, may result in the loss of data (depending on the specific value being converted and/or the range of the underlying types):

```c++
int i1 = 3.5; // The 0.5 is dropped, resulting in lost data.
int i2 = 3.0; // Okay, will be converted to value 3, so no data is lost.
```

In C++, a **narrowing conversion** is a numeric conversion that may result in the loss of data. ***Such narrowing conversions include:***

- From a floating point type to an integral type.
- From a wider floating point type to a narrower floating point type, unless the value being converted is `constexpr` and is in range of the destination type (even if it can not be represented exactly).
- From an integer to a floating point type, unless the value being converted is `constexpr` and is in range of the destination type and can be converted back into the original type without data loss.
- From a wider integer type to a narrower integer type, unless the value being converted is `constexpr` and after integral promotion will fit into the destination type.

The good news is that you don’t need to remember these. Your compiler will usually issue a warning (or error) **when it determines that an implicit narrowing conversion is required**.

>**Warning**  
Compilers will often not warn when converting a `signed int` to an `unsigned int`, or vice-versa, even though these are narrowing conversions. Be extra careful of inadvertent conversions between these types (particularly when passing an argument to a function taking a parameter of the opposite sign).

For example, when compiling the following program:

```c++
int main() {
    int i = 3.5;
}
```

Visual Studio produces the following warning:

```c++
warning C4244: 'initializing': conversion from 'double' to 'int', possible loss of data
```

In general, narrowing conversions should be avoided, but there are situational cases where you might need to do one. In such cases, you should make the implicit narrowing conversion explicit by using `static_cast`. For example:

```c++
void someFcn(int i) {}

int main() {
    double d{ 5.0 };

    // bad: Will generate compiler warning about narrowing conversion
    someFcn(d); 

    // good: We're explicitly telling the compiler
    // this narrowing conversion is expected, no warning generated.
    someFcn(static_cast<int>(d)); 
}
```

>**Best practice**  
Avoid narrowing conversions whenever possible. If you do need to perform one, use `static_cast` to make it an explicit conversion.


## Brace initialization disallows narrowing conversions

Narrowing conversions are strictly disallowed when using brace initialization (which is one of the primary reasons this initialization form is preferred):

```c++
int main() {
    int i { 3.5 }; // won't compile
}
```

Visual Studio produces the following error:

```c++
error C2397: conversion from 'double' to 'int' requires a narrowing conversion
```


## More on numeric conversions

The specific rules for numeric conversions are complicated and numerous, so here are the most important things to remember.

In all cases, converting a value into a type whose range doesn’t support that value will lead to results that are probably unexpected. For example:

```c++
int main() {
    int i{ 30000 };
    char c = i; // chars have range -128 to 127

    std::cout << static_cast<int>(c);   // "48"
}
```

In this example, we’ve assigned a large integer to a variable with type char (that has range -128 to 127). This causes the char to overflow, and produces an unexpected result.

Converting from a larger integral or floating point type to a smaller type from the same family will generally work so long as the value fits in the range of the smaller type. For example:

```c++
int i{ 2 };
short s = i; // convert from int to short
std::cout << s << '\n'; // "2"

double d{ 0.1234 };
float f = d;
std::cout << f << '\n'; // "0.1234"
```

This produces the expected result.

In the case of floating point values, some rounding may occur due to a loss of precision in the smaller type. For example:

```c++
// `double` value 0.123456789 has 9 significant digits,
// but `float` can only support about 7.
float f = 0.123456789; 

// `std::setprecision` defined in iomanip header.
std::cout << std::setprecision(9) << f << '\n'; 
// "0.123456791"
```

In this case, we see a loss of precision because the `float` can’t hold as much precision as a `double`.

Converting from an integer to a floating point number generally works as long as the value fits within the range of the floating point type. For example:

```c++
int i{ 10 };
float f = i;
std::cout << f; // "10"
```

This produces the expected result.

Converting from a floating point to an integer works as long as the value fits within the range of the integer, but any fractional values are lost. For example:

```c++
int i = 3.5;
std::cout << i << '\n'; // "3"
```

In this example, the fractional value (`.5`) is lost.

While the numeric conversion rules might seem scary, in reality the compiler will generally warn you if you try to do something dangerous (excluding some signed/unsigned conversions).