---
title : "09.13 — Introduction to program-defined (user-defined) types"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - user-defined type
    - program-defined type
    - type definition
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---



Because fundamental types are defined as part of the core C++ language, **they are available for immediate use**. For example, if we want to define a variable with a type of `int` or `double`, we can just do so:

```c++
int x;      // Define variable of fundamental type 'int'.
double d;   // Define variable of fundamental type 'double'.
```

**This is also true for the compound types that are simple extensions of fundamental types** (including functions, pointers, references, and arrays):

```c++
void fcn(int) {};   // Define a function of type void()(int).
int* ptr;           // Define variable of compound type 'pointer to int'.
int& ref;           // Define variable of compound type 'reference to int'.
int arr[5];         // Define an array of 5 integers of type int[5] 
                    // (we'll cover this in a future chapter).
```

This works because the C++ language already knows what the type names (and symbols) for these types mean -- we do not need to provide or import any definitions.

However, consider the case of a type alias (introduced in [lesson 8.6 -- Typedefs and type aliases](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/typedefs-and-type-aliases/)), *which allows us to define a new name for an existing type*. Because a type alias introduces a new identifier into the program, **a type alias must be defined before it can be used**:

```c++
#include <iostream>

// Define a type alias with identifier 'length'.
using length = int;

int main() {

    // We can use 'length' here since we defined it above.
    length x{ 5 };
    std::cout << x;
}
```

If we were to omit the definition of `length`, the compiler wouldn’t know what a `length` is, and would complain when we try to define a variable using that type. **The definition for `length` doesn’t create an object -- *it just tells the compiler what a `length` is* so it can be used later.**


## What are user-defined / program-defined types?

Back in the introduction to this chapter ([9.1 -- Introduction to compound data types](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-compound-data-types/)), we introduced the challenge of wanting to store a fraction, which has a numerator and denominator that are conceptually linked together. In that lesson, we discussed some of the challenges with using two separate integers to store a fraction’s numerator and denominator independently.

If C++ had a built-in fraction type, that would have been perfect -- but it doesn’t. And there are hundreds of other potentially useful types that C++ doesn’t include because it’s just not possible to anticipate everything that someone might need (let alone implement and test those things).

Instead, C++ solves for such problems in a different way: by allowing us to create entirely new, custom types for use in our programs! Such types are often called **user-defined types** (though we think the term program-defined types is better -- we’ll discuss the difference later in this lesson). **C++ has two categories of compound types that allow for this:** the *enumerated types* (including unscoped and scoped enumerations), and the *class types* (including structs, classes, and unions).


## Defining program-defined types

Just like type aliases, **program-defined types must also be defined before they can be used**. The definition for a program-defined type is called a **type definition**.

Although we haven’t covered what a struct is yet, here’s an example showing the definition of custom `Fraction` type and an instantiation of an object using that type:

```c++
// Define a program-defined type named Fraction 
// so the compiler understands what a Fraction is
// (we'll explain what a struct is and how to use them later in this chapter).
// This only defines what a Fraction type looks like, 
// it doesn't create one.
struct Fraction {
    int numerator{};
    int denominator{};
};

// Now we can make use of our Fraction type.
int main() {

    // This actually instantiates a Fraction object named f.
    Fraction f{ 3, 4 };
}
```

In this example, we’re using the `struct` keyword to define a new program-defined type named `Fraction` (in the global scope, so it can be used anywhere in the rest of the file). **This doesn’t allocate any memory -- *it just tells the compiler what a `Fraction` looks like*, so we can allocate objects of a `Fraction` type later.** Then, inside `main()`, we instantiate (and initialize) a variable of type `Fraction` named `f`.

**Program-defined type definitions always end in a semicolon.** *Failure to include the semicolon at the end of a type definition is a common programmer error, and one that can be hard to debug because the compiler will usually error on the line after the type definition.* For example, if you remove the semicolon from the end of the `Fraction` definition (line 8) of the example above, the compiler will probably complain about the definition of `main()` (line 11).

>**Warning**  
Don’t forget to end your type definitions with a semicolon, otherwise the compiler will typically error on the next line of code.

We’ll show more examples of defining and using program-defined types in the next lesson ([9.14 -- Unscoped enumerations](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/unscoped-enumerations/)), and we cover structs starting in [lesson 9.17 -- Introduction to structs, members, and member selection](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-structs-members-and-member-selection/).


## Naming program-defined types

By convention, program-defined types are named starting with a capital letter and don’t use a “_t” suffix (e.g. `Fraction`, not fraction or fraction_t). **This nomenclature helps differentiate program-defined type names from type aliases (which often use a “_t” or “_type” suffix) and variable names (which start with a lower case letter).**

>**Best practice**  
Whenever you create a new program-defined type, name it starting with a capital letter.

New programmers sometimes find variable definitions such as the following confusing because of the similarity between the type name and variable name:

```c++
// Instantiates a variable named fraction of type Fraction.
Fraction fraction{};
```

**But this is no different than any other variable definition:** the type (`Fraction`) comes first (and because `Fraction` is capitalized, we know it’s a program-defined type), then the variable name (`fraction`), and then an optional initializer. Because C++ is case-sensitive, there is no naming conflict here!


## Using program-defined types throughout a multi-file program

**Every code file that uses a program-defined type *needs to see the full type definition* before it is used.** *A forward declaration is not sufficient.* **This is required so that *the compiler knows how much memory to allocate for objects of that type*.**

**To propagate type definitions into the code files that need them, program-defined types are typically defined in header files, and then #included into any code file that requires that type definition.** These header files are typically given the same name as the program-defined type (e.g. a program-defined type named `Fraction` would be defined in `Fraction.h`)

>**Best practice**  
A program-defined type used in **only one** code file should be defined in that code file as close to the first point of use as possible.  
A program-defined type used in **multiple** code files should be defined in a header file with the same name as the program-defined type and then #included into each code file as needed.

Here’s an example of what our `Fraction` type would look like if we moved it to a header file (named `Fraction.h`) so that it could be included into multiple code files:

`Fraction.h`:

```c++
#ifndef FRACTION_H
#define FRACTION_H

// Define a new type named Fraction.
// This only defines what a Fraction looks like, 
// it doesn't create one.
// Note that this is a full definition,
// not a forward declaration.
struct Fraction {
    int numerator{};
    int denominator{};
};

#endif
```

`Fraction.cpp`:

```c++
// Include our Fraction definition in this code file.
#include "Fraction.h" 

// Now we can make use of our Fraction type.
int main() {

    // This actually creates a Fraction object named f.
    Fraction f{ 3, 4 };
}
```


## Type definitions are exempt from the one-definition rule

In [lesson 2.6 -- Forward declarations and definitions](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/forward-declarations/), we discussed how the one-definition rule required us to define functions (and variables) in code files (not headers), and propagate only the forward declarations via header files.

If type definitions were subject to the same limitations, we would only be able to propagate forward declarations for types, not the full type definitions. This isn’t sufficient for us to be able to use those type definitions (since the compiler needs to see the full type definition).

Consequently, **types have been exempted from the one-definition rule**, so that full type definitions can be propagated to multiple files, even if that results in a duplicate definition.

**All type definitions for a given type must be identical, otherwise undefined behavior will result.**


## Nomenclature: user-defined types vs program-defined types

The term user-defined type sometimes comes up in casual conversation, as well as being mentioned (but not defined) in the C++ language standard. *In casual conversation*, the term tends to mean “a type that you defined yourself” (such as the `Fraction` type example above). Sometimes this also includes type aliases.

However, as used *in the C++ language standard*, a user-defined type is intended to be any type not defined as part of the core C++ language. This means that types defined in the C++ standard library (such as `std::string`) are technically considered to be user-defined types.

**Because of mismatch in casual vs technical meaning, we’ll prefer the term program-defined type when talking about types that are defined by a programmer for use in their own programs.**