---
permalink: /LearnCpp/
title : "09.02 — Value categories (lvalues and rvalues)"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - expression
    - lvalue, l-value, left value, locator value
    - rvalue, right value, r-value
    - glvalue
    - prvalue
    - xvalue
    - move semantic
    - having an identity
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---


Before we talk about our first compound type (lvalue references), we’re going to take a little detour and talk about what an lvalue is.

In [lesson 1.10 -- Introduction to expressions](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-expressions/), we defined an **expression** as, “a combination of literals, variables, operators, and function calls that can be executed to produce a singular value”.
For example:

```c++
#include <iostream>

// The expression 2 + 3 produces the value 5.
int main() { std::cout << 2 + 3; }
```

In the above program, the expression `2 + 3` is evaluated to produce the value `5`, which is then printed to the console.

In [lesson 5.4 -- Increment/decrement operators, and side effects](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/increment-decrement-operators-and-side-effects/), we also noted that **expressions can produce side effects that outlive the expression**:

```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    int x{ 5 };

    // This expression statement 
    // has the side-effect of incrementing x.
    ++x;

    std::cout << x;     // "6"
}
```

In the above program, the expression `++x` increments the value of `x`, and that value remains changed even after the expression has finished evaluating.

**Besides producing values and side effects, expressions can do one more thing: *they can evaluate to objects or functions*.** We’ll explore this point further in just a moment.

>>>lambda expression?


## The properties of an expression

To help determine how expressions should evaluate and where they can be used, **all expressions in C++ have two properties: a type and a value category**.


### The type of an expression

**The type of an expression is equivalent to the type of the value, object, or function that results from the evaluated expression.** For example:

```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {

    // int / int => int
    auto v1{ 12 / 4 };

    // double / int => double
    auto v2{ 12.0 / 4 };
}
```

For `v1`, the compiler will determine (at compile time) that a division with two `int` operands will produce an `int` result, so `int` is the type of this expression. Via type inference, `int` will then be used as the type of `v1`.

For `v2`, the compiler will determine (at compile time) that a division with a `double` operand and an `int` operand will produce a `double` result. Remember that arithmetic operators must have operands of matching types, so in this case, the `int` operand gets promoted to a `double`, and a floating point division is performed. So `double` is the type of this expression.

**The compiler can use the type of an expression to determine whether an expression is valid in a given context.** For example:

```c++
#include <iostream>

void print(int x) { std::cout << x; }

int main() {

    // compile error!
    // print() was expecting an int argument, 
    // we tried to pass in a string literal.
    print("foo");
}
```

In the above program, the `print(int)` function is expecting an `int` parameter. However, the type of the expression we’re passing in (the string literal `"foo"`) does not match, and no conversion can be found. So a compile error results.

**Note that the *type of an expression* must be determinable at compile time** (otherwise type checking and type deduction wouldn’t work) -- **however, the *value of an expression* may be determined at either compile time (if the expression is constexpr) or runtime (if the expression is not constexpr)**.


### The value category of an expression

Now consider the following program:

```c++
int main() {
    int x{};

    // valid: We can assign 5 to x.
    x = 5;

    // compile error! 
    // Cannot assign value of x to literal value 5.
    5 = x;
}
```

One of these assignment statements is valid (assigning value `5` to variable `x`) and one is not (what would it mean to assign the value of `x` to the literal value `5`?). So how does the compiler know which expressions can legally appear on either side of an assignment statement?

The answer lies in the second property of expressions: the value category. **The value category of an expression indicates whether an expression resolves to a value, a function, or an object of some kind.**

*Prior to `C++11`, there were only two possible value categories: lvalue and rvalue.*

**In `C++11`, three additional value categories (glvalue, prvalue, and xvalue) were added to support a new feature called move semantics.**

>**Author’s note**  
In this lesson, we’ll stick to the pre-`C++11` view of value categories, as this makes for a gentler introduction to value categories (and is all that we need for the moment). We’ll cover move semantics (and the additional three value categories) in a future chapter.


#### Lvalue and rvalue expressions

An **lvalue** (pronounced “ell-value”, short for “**left value**” or “**locator value**”, and sometimes written as “**l-value**”) is *an expression that evaluates to a function or object that has an identity*. An object or function **has an identity** if it has an identifier (such as a variable or named function) or an ***identifiable memory address*** (one that can be retrieved using `operator&`, which we cover in [lesson 9.6 -- Introduction to pointers](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-pointers/)). **Identifiable objects persist beyond the scope of the expression.**

>>>identifiable identifiable memory address

```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    int x{};

    // x is an lvalue expression.
    std::cout << x << '\n';
}
```

In the above program, the expression `x` is an lvalue expression as it evaluates to variable `x` (which has an identifier).

Since the introduction of constants into the language, **lvalues come in two subtypes:**
- a **modifiable lvalue** is an lvalue whose value can be modified.
- A **non-modifiable lvalue** is an lvalue whose value can’t be modified (because the lvalue is const or constexpr).

```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    int x{};
    const double d{ 2.0 };

    // x is a modifiable lvalue expression.
    std::cout << x << '\n';

    // d is a non-modifiable lvalue expression.
    std::cout << d << '\n';
}
```

An **rvalue** (pronounced “arr-value”, short for “**right value**”, and sometimes written as **r-value**) is an expression that is not an lvalue. *Commonly seen rvalues include literals (except string literals, which are lvalues) and the return value of functions or operators.* **Rvalues only exist within the scope of the expression in which they are used.**

>>>except string literals!!!

```c++
#include <iostream>

int return5() { return 5; }

int main() {

    // 5 is an rvalue expression.
    int x{ 5 };

    // 1.2 is an rvalue expression.
    const double d{ 1.2 };

    // x is a modifiable lvalue expression.
    std::cout << x << '\n';

    // d is a non-modifiable lvalue expression.
    std::cout << d << '\n';

    // return5() is an rvalue expression 
    // (since the result is returned by value).
    std::cout << return5();

    // x + 1 is a rvalue.
    std::cout << x + 1 << '\n';

    // The result of static casting d to an int
    // is an rvalue.
    std::cout << static_cast<int>(d) << '\n';
}
```

You may be wondering why `return5()` and `x + 1` are rvalues: **the answer is because these expressions produce values that must be used immediately (within the scope of the expression) or they are discarded**.

**Now we can answer the question about why `x = 5` is valid but `5 = x` is not:** an assignment operation requires the left operand of the assignment to be a modifiable lvalue expression, and the right operand to be an rvalue expression. The latter assignment (`5 = x`) fails because the expression 5 isn’t an lvalue.

```c++
int main() {
    int x{};

    // Assignment requires the left operand 
    // to be a modifiable lvalue expression 
    // and the right operand
    // to be an rvalue expression.

    // valid: x is a modifiable lvalue expression 
    // and 5 is an rvalue expression.
    x = 5;

    // compile error!
    // 5 is an rvalue expression 
    // and x is a modifiable lvalue expression.
    5 = x;
}
```

>**Related content**  
A full list of lvalue and rvalue expressions can be found [here](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/value_category). In `C++11`, rvalues are broken into two subtypes: prvalues and xvalues, so the rvalues we’re talking about here are the sum of both of those categories.


#### L-value to r-value conversion

We said above that the assignment operator expects the right operand to be an rvalue expression, so why does code like this work?

```c++
int main() {
    int x{ 1 };
    int y{ 2 };

    // y is a modifiable lvalue, not an rvalue, 
    // but this is legal.
    x = y;
}
```

**The answer is because lvalues will implicitly convert to rvalues**, so an lvalue can be used wherever an rvalue is required.

Now consider this snippet:

```c++
int main() {
    int x{ 2 };

    x = x + 1;
}
```

In this statement, the variable `x` is being used in two different contexts. On the left side of the assignment operator, `x` is an lvalue expression that evaluates to variable `x`. On the right side of the assignment operator, `x + 1` is an rvalue expression that evaluates to the value `3`.

Now that we’ve covered lvalues, we can get to our first compound type: the lvalue reference.

>**Key insight**  
As a rule of thumb to identify lvalue and rvalue expressions:  
- **lvalues expressions** are those that evaluate to variables or other identifiable objects that persist beyond the end of the expression.  
- **rvalues expressions** are those that evaluate to literals or the returned value of functions and operators that are discarded at the end of the expression.
