---
title : "12.02 — Classes and class members"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - class
    - member function, method
    - implicit object
    - member type, nested type
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---

recent check : 03/11/2022



While C++ provides a number of fundamental data types (e.g. `char`, `int`, `long`, `float`, `double`, etc…) that are often sufficient for solving relatively simple problems, it can be difficult to solve complex problems using just these types. One of C++’s more useful features is the ability to define your own data types that better correspond to the problem being solved. You have already seen how enumerated types and structs can be used to create your own custom data types.

Here is an example of a struct used to hold a date:

```c++
struct DateStruct {
    int year{};
    int month{};
    int day{};
};
```

Enumerated types and data-only structs (structs that only contain variables) represent the traditional non-object-oriented programming world, as they can only hold data. We can create and initialize this struct as follows:

```c++
// Use uniform initialization.
DateStruct today{ 2020, 10, 14 };   
```

Now, if we want to print the date to the screen (something we probably want to do a lot), it makes sense to write a function to do this. Here’s a full program:

```c++
#include <iostream>

struct DateStruct {
    int year{};
    int month{};
    int day{};
};

void print(const DateStruct& date) {
    std::cout << date.year << '/'
        << date.month << '/' << date.day;
}

int main() {
    DateStruct today{ 2020, 10, 14 };

    // Use member selection operator 
    // to select a member of the struct.
    today.day = 16;
    print(today);
    // "2020/10/16"
}
```


## Classes

In the world of object-oriented programming, we often want our types to not only hold data, but provide functions that work with the data as well. In C++, this is typically done via the `class` keyword. The `class` keyword defines a new user-defined type called a **class**.

In C++, classes and structs are essentially the same. In fact, the following struct and class are effectively identical:

```c++
struct DateStruct {
    int year{};
    int month{};
    int day{};
};

class DateClass {
public:
    int m_year{};
    int m_month{};
    int m_day{};
};
```

Note that the only significant difference is the `public:` keyword in the class. We will discuss the function of this keyword in the next lesson.

**Just like a struct declaration, a class declaration doesn't allocate any memory**. It only defines what the class looks like.

>**Warning**  
Just like with structs, one of the easiest mistakes to make in C++ is to forget the semicolon at the end of a class declaration. This will cause a compiler error on the next line of code. Modern compilers like Visual Studio 2010 will give you an indication that you may have forgotten a semicolon, but older or less sophisticated compilers may not, which can make the actual error hard to find.

**Class (and struct) definitions are like a blueprint** -- they describe what the resulting object will look like, but they do not actually create the object. **To actually create an object of the class, a variable of that class type must be defined:**

```c++
// Declare a variable of class DateClass.
DateClass today{ 2020, 10, 14 };
```

>**A reminder**  
Initialize the member variables of a class at the point of declaration.


## Member Functions

In addition to holding data, classes (and structs) can also contain functions! Functions defined inside of a class are called **member functions** (or sometimes **methods**). **Member functions can be defined *inside* or *outside* of the class definition.** We’ll define them inside the class for now (for simplicity), and show how to define them outside the class later.

Here is our `Date` class with a member function to print the date:

```c++
class DateClass {
public:
    int m_year{};
    int m_month{};
    int m_day{};

    // Defines a member function named print().
    void print() {
        std::cout << m_year << '/'
            << m_month << '/' << m_day;
    }
};
```

Just like members of a struct, **members (variables and functions) of a class are accessed using the member selector operator** (`.`):

```c++
#include <iostream>

class DateClass {
public:
    int m_year{};
    int m_month{};
    int m_day{};

    void print() {
        std::cout << m_year << '/'
            << m_month << '/' << m_day;
    }
};

int main() {
    DateClass today{ 2020, 10, 14 };

    // Use member selection operator 
    // to select a member variable of the class.
    today.m_day = 16;

    // Use member selection operator 
    // to call a member function of the class.
    today.print();
    // "2020/10/16"
}
```

Note how similar this program is to the struct version we wrote above.

**However, there are a few differences.**

- In the `DateStruct` version of `print()` from the example above, **we needed to pass the struct itself to the `print()` function *as the first parameter***. Otherwise, `print()` wouldn’t know what `DateStruct` we wanted to use. *We then had to reference this parameter inside the function explicitly.*

    Member functions work slightly differently: **All member function calls must be associated with an object of the class**. When we call “`today.print()`”, we’re telling the compiler to call the `print()` member function, associated with the `today` object.

    Now let’s take a look at the definition of the print member function again:

    ```c++
    void print() {
        std::cout << m_year << '/'
            << m_month << '/' << m_day;
    }
    ```

    What do `m_year`, `m_month`, and `m_day` actually refer to? **They refer to the associated object (as determined by the caller).**

    So when we call “`today.print()`”, the compiler interprets `m_day` as `today.m_day`, `m_month` as `today.m_month`, and `m_year` as `today.m_year`. If we called “`tomorrow.print()`”, `m_day` would refer to `tomorrow.m_day` instead.

    In this way, the associated object is essentially implicitly passed to the member function. For this reason, it is often called **the implicit object**.

    We’ll talk more about how the implicit object passing works in detail in a later lesson in this chapter.

    The key point is that *with non-member functions*, we have to pass data to the function to work with. ***With member functions*, we can assume we always have an implicit object of the class to work with!**

    Using the “`m_`” prefix for member variables helps distinguish member variables from function parameters or local variables inside member functions. This is useful for several reasons. First, when we see an assignment to a variable with the “`m_`” prefix, we know that we are changing the state of the class instance. Second, unlike function parameters or local variables, which are declared within the function, member variables are declared in the class definition. Consequently, if we want to know how a variable with the “`m_`” prefix is declared, we know that we should look in the class definition instead of within the function.

    By convention, class names should begin with an upper-case letter.

    >**Best practice**  
    Name your classes starting with a capital letter.

    Here’s another example of a class:

    ```c++
    #include <iostream>
    #include <string>

    class Employee {
    public:
        std::string m_name{};
        int m_id{};
        double m_wage{};

        // Print employee information to the screen.
        void print() {
            std::cout << "Name: " << m_name
                << "  Id: " << m_id
                << "  Wage: $" << m_wage << '\n';
        }
    };

    int main() {

        // Declare two employees.
        Employee alex{ "Alex", 1, 25.00 };
        Employee joe{ "Joe", 2, 22.25 };

        // Print out the employee information.
        alex.print();
        // "Name: Alex  Id: 1  Wage: $25"
        joe.print();
        // "Name: Joe  Id: 2  Wage: $22.25"
    }
    ```

- *With normal non-member functions*, a function can’t call a function that’s defined “below” it (without a forward declaration):

    ```c++
    void x() {

        // You can't call y() from here
        // unless the compiler has already seen 
        // a forward declaration for y().

    }

    void y() {}
    ```

    ***With member functions*, this limitation doesn’t apply:**

    ```c++
    class foo {
    public:

        // Okay to call y() here,
        // even though y() isn't defined 
        // until later in this class.
        void x() { y(); } 
        void y() { };
    };
    ```


## Member types

In addition to member variables and member functions, classes can have **member types** or **nested types** (including type aliases). In the following example, we’re creating a calculator where we can swiftly change the type of number it’s using if we ever need to.

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

class Calculator {
public:

    // This is a nested type alias.
    using number_type = int;

    std::vector<number_type> m_resultHistory{};

    number_type add(number_type a, number_type b) {
        auto result{ a + b };

        m_resultHistory.push_back(result);

        return result;
    }
};

int main() {
    Calculator calculator;

    std::cout << calculator.add(3, 4) << '\n';      // "7"
    std::cout << calculator.add(99, 24) << '\n';    // "123"

    for (Calculator::number_type result : calculator.m_resultHistory)
        std::cout << result << '\n';
    // "7 123"
}
```

In such a context, **the class name effectively acts like a namespace for the nested type**. *From inside the class*, we only need reference `number_type`. *From outside the class*, we can access the type via `Calculator::number_type`.

**When we decide that an `int` no longer fulfills our needs and we want to use a `double`, we only need to update the type alias**, rather than having to replace every occurrence of `int` with `double`.

Type alias members make code easier to maintain and can reduce typing. ***Template classes, which we’ll cover later, often make use of type alias members.*** *You’ve already seen this as `std::vector::size_type`, where `size_type` is an alias for an unsigned integer.*

>>> examples and `std::vector::size_type` ...

Up to now, we used a “`_t`” suffix for type aliases. **For member type aliases, a “`_type`” or no suffix at all is more common.**

***Nested types cannot be forward declared.*** *Generally, nested types should only be used when the nested type is used exclusively within that class.* Note that since classes are types, **it’s possible to nest classes inside other classes** -- this is uncommon and is typically only done by advanced programmers.


## A note about structs in C++

***In C*, structs only have data members, not member functions.** *In C++*, after designing classes (using the `class` keyword), Bjarne Stroustrup spent some amount of time considering whether structs (which were inherited from C) should be granted the ability to have member functions. Upon consideration, he determined that they should, in part to have a unified ruleset for both. So although we wrote the above programs using the `class` keyword, we could have used the `struct` keyword instead.

Many developers (including myself) feel this was the incorrect decision to be made, as it can lead to dangerous assumptions. **For example, it’s fair to assume a class will clean up after itself (e.g. a class that allocates memory will deallocate it before being destroyed), *but it’s not safe to assume a struct will.*** *Consequently, we recommend using the `struct` keyword for data-only structures, and the `class` keyword for defining objects that require both data and functions to be bundled together.*

>**Best practice**  
Use the `struct` keyword for data-only structures. Use the `class` keyword for objects that have both data and functions.

>>>Structs could very well clean up after themselves, but by convention, they don't. I suppose that's because structs originally came from C, which doesn't have any automatic cleanup.

>>>???


## You have already been using classes without knowing it

It turns out that the C++ standard library is full of classes that have been created for your benefit. `std::string`, `std::vector`, and `std::array` are all class types! So when you create an object of any of these types, you’re instantiating a class object. And when you call a function using these objects, you’re calling a member function.

```c++
#include <string>
#include <array>
#include <vector>
#include <iostream>

int main() {

    // Instantiate a string class object
    std::string s{ "Hello, world!" };

    // Instantiate an array class object.
    std::array<int, 3> a{ 1, 2, 3 };

    // Instantiate a vector class object.
    std::vector<double> v{ 1.1, 2.2, 3.3 };

    // Call a member function.
    std::cout << "length: " << s.length() << '\n';
}
```


## Conclusion

The `class` keyword lets us create a custom type in C++ that can contain both member variables and member functions. Classes form the basis for Object-oriented programming, and we’ll spend the rest of this chapter and many of the future chapters exploring all they have to offer!