---
permalink: /LearnCpp/
title : "12.05 — Constructors"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - aggregate initialization
    - constructor
    - default constructor
    - value-initialization
    - default-initialization
    - implicit constructor, implicitly generated constructor
    - = default
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---

recent check : 03/11/2022



*When all members of a class (or struct) are public*, we can use **aggregate initialization** to initialize the class (or struct) directly using list-initialization:

```c++
class Foo {
public:
    int m_x{};
    int m_y{};
};

int main() {

    // list-initialization
    Foo foo{ 6, 7 }; 
}
```

However, *as soon as we make any member variables private*, we’re no longer able to initialize classes in this way. It does make sense: if you can’t *directly* access a variable (because it’s private), **you shouldn’t be able to *directly* initialize it**.

So then how do we initialize a class with private member variables? The answer is through constructors.


## Constructors

A **constructor** is a special kind of class member function that is *automatically called when an object of that class is created*. **Constructors are typically used *to initialize member variables of the class* to appropriate user-provided values, or *to do any setup steps necessary for the class to be used* (e.g. open a file or database).**

After a constructor executes, the object should be in a well-defined, usable state.

Unlike normal member functions, constructors have specific rules for how they *must* be named:

- Constructors must have the same name as the class (with the same capitalization)
- Constructors have no return type (not even void)


## Default constructors and default initialization

A constructor *that takes no parameters (or has parameters that all have default values)* is called a **default constructor**. *The default constructor is called if no user-provided initialization values are provided.*

Here is an example of a class that has a default constructor:

```c++
#include <iostream>

class Fraction {
private:
    int m_numerator{};
    int m_denominator{};

public:
    // default constructor
    Fraction() {
        m_numerator = 0;
        m_denominator = 1;
    }

    int getNumerator() { return m_numerator; }
    int getDenominator() { return m_denominator; }
    double getValue() {
        return static_cast<double>(m_numerator)
            / m_denominator;
    }
};

int main() {

    // Calls Fraction() default constructor.
    Fraction frac{};

    std::cout << frac.getNumerator() << '/'
        << frac.getDenominator() << '\n';
    // "0/1"
}
```

This class was designed to hold a fractional value as an integer numerator and denominator. We have defined a default constructor named `Fraction` (the same as the class).

When the line `Fraction frac{};` executes, the compiler will see that we’re instantiating an object of type `Fraction` with no arguments. It then performs **value-initialization** of `frac`, that is, the default constructor gets called. (Although technically incorrect, this is often called **default initialization**.) **In this case, the default constructor will be called *immediately after memory has been allocated and cleared for the object***. The default constructor runs just like a normal function (assigning the values `0` to `m_numerator` and `1` to `m_denominator`).


## Value-initialization

In the above program, we initialized our class object *using value-initialization*:

```c++
// value-initialization using empty set of braces
Fraction frac{}; 
```

We can also initialize class objects *using default-initialization*:

```c++
// default-initialization,
// Calls default constructor.
Fraction frac; 
```

**For the most part, default- and value-initialization of a class object results in the same outcome: *the default constructor is called*.**

Many programmers favor default-initialization over value-initialization for class objects. **This is because when using value-initialization, the compiler may zero-initialize the class members *before calling the default constructor in certain cases***, which is slightly inefficient (C++ programmers don’t like paying for features they’re not using).

>>>in certain cases???

However, favoring default-initialization also comes with a downside: **you have to know whether a type will initialize itself**, i.e. it is a class-type and all members have an initializer, or there is a default-constructor that initializes all member variables. *If you see a defined variable without an initializer, you have to think about whether that’s a mistake or not (depending on what type the object it is).*

For example, the following code causes undefined behavior:

```c++
#include <iostream>

class Fraction {
private:
    int m_numerator;        // removed initializers
    int m_denominator{ 2 };

public:
    // removed default-constructor


    int getNumerator() { return m_numerator; }
    int getDenominator() { return m_denominator; }
    double getValue() {
        return static_cast<double>(m_numerator)
            / m_denominator;
    }
};

int main() {
    Fraction frac;

    // frac is uninitialized (because of data member int m_numerator).
    // Accessing its members causes undefined behavior.
    std::cout << frac.getNumerator() << '/' << frac.getDenominator() << '\n';
}
```

While you might be able to initialize all members in the classes you write, it’s not feasible to read the definitions of all classes you use to make sure they do the same.

Favoring value initialization for class objects is simple, consistent, and can help you catch errors, particularly while you are learning.

>**Best practice**  
Favor list-initialization over default-initialization for class objects.

>>>Initialization rules are always a hassle to figure out.  
```c++
class Date { int m_day; }
Date today;         // case 1
Date tomorrow{};    // case 2
```
1. `Date today;`  
Default-initialization is performed. `Date` has an implicitly-defined default constructor (Because it has no other constructors), so this constructor is called. The generated default constructor has the same effect as an empty constructor, so `m_day` is default-initialized to an indeterminate value (ie. it is uninitialized).  
2. `Date tomorrow{};`  
Value-initialization is performed. `Date` has an implicitly-defined default constructor, so is it zero-initialized, which causes all members to be zero-initialized as well (The constructor of `Date` isn't used).


## Direct- and list-initialization using constructors with parameters

While the default constructor is great for ensuring our classes are initialized with reasonable default values, often times we want instances of our class to have specific values that we provide. **Fortunately, constructors can also be declared with parameters.** Here is an example of a constructor that takes two integer parameters that are used to initialize the numerator and denominator:

```c++
#include <cassert>

class Fraction {
private:
    int m_numerator{};
    int m_denominator{};

public:
    // default constructor
    Fraction() {
        m_numerator = 0;
        m_denominator = 1;
    }

    // Constructor with two parameters, 
    // one parameter having a default value.
    Fraction(int numerator, int denominator = 1) {
        assert(denominator != 0);
        m_numerator = numerator;
        m_denominator = denominator;
    }

    int getNumerator() { return m_numerator; }
    int getDenominator() { return m_denominator; }
    double getValue() {
        return static_cast<double>(m_numerator)
            / m_denominator;
    }
};
```

Note that we now have two constructors: a default constructor that will be called in the default case, and a second constructor that takes two parameters. **These two constructors can coexist peacefully in the same class due to function overloading.** *In fact, you can define as many constructors as you want, so long as each has a unique signature (number and type of parameters).*

So how do we use this constructor with parameters? It’s simple! We can use list or direct initialization:

```c++
// list initialization, 
// Calls Fraction(int, int).
Fraction fiveThirds{ 5, 3 };  

// direct initialization, 
// Also calls Fraction(int, int).
Fraction threeQuarters(3, 4); 
```

**As always, we prefer list initialization.** ***We’ll discover reasons (Templates and `std::initializer_list`) to use direct initialization when calling constructors later in the tutorials.*** There is another special constructor that might make brace initialization do something different, in that case we have to use direct initialization. We’ll talk about these constructors later.

>>> ???

Note that we have given the second parameter of the constructor with parameters a default value, so the following is also legal:

```c++
// Calls Fraction(int, int) constructor,
// second parameter uses default value of 1.
Fraction six{ 6 }; 
```

**Default values for constructors work exactly the same way as with any other functions**, so in the above case where we call `six{ 6 }`, the `Fraction(int, int)` function is called with the second parameter defaulted to value `1`.

>**Best practice**  
Favor brace initialization to initialize class objects.


## Copy initialization using equals with classes

**Much like with fundamental variables, it’s also possible to initialize classes using copy initialization:**

```c++
// Copy initialize a Fraction, 
// will call Fraction(6, 1)
Fraction six = Fraction{ 6 };

// Copy initialize a Fraction.
// The compiler will try to find a way
// to convert 7 to a Fraction,
// which will invoke the Fraction(7, 1) constructor.
Fraction seven = 7;
```

However, **we recommend you avoid this form of initialization with classes**, as it may be less efficient. Although direct-initialization, list-initialization, and copy-initialization all work identically *with fundamental types*, **copy-initialization does not work the same *with classes*** (though the end-result is often the same). We’ll explore the differences in more detail in a future chapter.


## Reducing your constructors

In the above two-constructor declaration of the Fraction class, the default constructor is actually somewhat redundant. We could simplify this class as follows:

```c++
#include <cassert>

class Fraction {
private:
    int m_numerator{};
    int m_denominator{};

public:
    // Default constructor
    Fraction(int numerator = 0, int denominator = 1) {
        assert(denominator != 0);

        m_numerator = numerator;
        m_denominator = denominator;
    }

    int getNumerator() { return m_numerator; }
    int getDenominator() { return m_denominator; }
    double getValue() {
        return static_cast<double>(m_numerator)
            / m_denominator;
    }
};
```

Although this constructor is still a default constructor, it has now been defined in a way that it can accept one or two user-provided values as well.

```c++
// Will call Fraction(0, 1).
Fraction zero;                  

// Will call Fraction(0, 1).
Fraction zero{};                

// Will call Fraction(6, 1).
Fraction six{ 6 };              

// Will call Fraction(5, 3).
Fraction fiveThirds{ 5, 3 };    
```

When implementing your constructors, **consider how you might keep the number of constructors down through smart defaulting of values**.


### A reminder about default parameters

The rules around defining and calling functions that have default parameters (described in [lesson 8.12 -- Default arguments](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/default-arguments/)) apply to constructors too. To recap, when defining a function with default parameters, all default parameters must follow any non-default parameters, i.e. there cannot be non-defaulted parameters after a defaulted parameter.

This may produce unexpected results for classes that have multiple default parameters of different types. Consider:

```c++
class Something {
public:
    // Allows us to construct a
    // Something(int, double), Something(int),
    // or Something().
    Something(int n = 0, double d = 1.2) {}
};

int main() {
    Something s1{ 1, 2.4 };
    Something s2{ 1 };
    Something s3{};

    // compile error!
    // There's no constructor
    // to handle Something(double).
    Something s4{ 2.4 };
}
```

With `s4`, we’ve attempted to construct a `Something` by providing only a `double`. This won’t compile, as the rules for how arguments match with default parameters won’t allow us to skip a non-rightmost parameter (in this case, the leftmost `int` parameter).

If we want to be able to construct a `Something` with only a `double`, we’ll need to add a second (non-default) constructor:

```c++
class Something {
public:
    Something(int n = 0, double d = 1.2) {}
    Something(double d) {}
};

int main() {
    Something s1{ 1, 2.4 };
    Something s2{ 1 };
    Something s3{};

    // Calls Something(double).
    Something s4{ 2.4 };
}
```


## An implicitly generated default constructor

*If your class has no constructors*, C++ will automatically generate a public default constructor for you. This is sometimes called an **implicit constructor** (or **implicitly generated constructor**).

Consider the following class:

```c++
class Date {
private:
    int m_year{ 1900 };
    int m_month{ 1 };
    int m_day{ 1 };

    // No user-provided constructors,
    // the compiler generates a default constructor.
};

int main() { Date date{}; }
```

The `Date` class has no constructors. Therefore, the compiler will generate a default constructor that allows us to create a `Date` object without arguments.

**When the generated default constructor is called, members will still be initialized if they have *non-static member initializers*.**

**If your class has any other constructors, the implicitly generated constructor will not be provided.** For example:

```c++
class Date {
private:
    int m_year{ 1900 };
    int m_month{ 1 };
    int m_day{ 1 };

public:
    // normal non-default constructor
    Date(int year, int month, int day) {
        m_year = year;
        m_month = month;
        m_day = day;
    }

    // No implicit constructor provided
    // because we already defined our own constructor.
};

int main() {

    // compile error! 
    // Can't instantiate object
    // because default constructor doesn't exist
    // and the compiler won't generate one.
    Date date{};

    // today is initialized to Jan 19th, 2020.
    Date today{ 2020, 1, 19 };
}
```

**If your class has another constructor and you want to allow default construction,** 

- you can either *add default arguments to every parameter of a constructor with parameters*, or 

- *explicitly define a default constructor*.

**There’s a third option as well:** 

- you can *use the `default` keyword* to tell the compiler to create a default constructor for us anyway:

>>>Be aware of making more than one default constructor while using `= default` keyword.

```c++
class Date {
private:
    int m_year{ 1900 };
    int m_month{ 1 };
    int m_day{ 1 };

public:
    // Tell the compiler to create a default constructor,
    // even if there are other user-provided constructors.
    Date() = default;

    // normal non-default constructor
    Date(int year, int month, int day) {
        m_year = year;
        m_month = month;
        m_day = day;
    }
};

int main() {

    // date is initialized to Jan 1st, 1900.
    Date date{};

    // today is initialized to Oct 14th, 2020.
    Date today{ 2020, 10, 14 };
}
```

Using `= default` is longer than writing a constructor with an empty body, but expresses better what your intentions are (to create a default constructor), and it’s safer, **because it can *zero-initialize* members even if they have not been initialized at their declaration**. **`= default` also works for other special constructors**, which we’ll talk about in the future.

>>>?? Can =dafault zero-initialize members??

>>>  
```c++
class A {
private:
    int m_num;
public:
    // recommended...
};
int main() {
    // a.m_num has a value 0.
    A a{};
}
```

>>>  
```c++
class A {
private:
    int m_num;
public:
    // recommended...
    A() = default;
};
int main() {
    // a.m_num has a value 0.
    A a{};
}
```

>>>  
```c++
class A {
private:
    int m_num;
public:
    // not recommended...
    A() {}
};
int main() {
    // a.m_num has a trash value...
    A a{};
}
```

>**Best practice**  
If you have constructors in your class and need a default constructor that does nothing (e.g. because all your members are initialized using non-static member initialization), use `= default`.


## Classes containing classes

*A class may contain other classes as member variables.* **By default, when the outer class is constructed, the member variables will have their default constructors called.** **This happens *before the body of the constructor executes*.**

>>>the meaning of "by default" ...

This can be demonstrated thusly:

```c++
#include <iostream>

class A {
public:
    A() { std::cout << "A\n"; }
};

class B {
private:
    // B contains A as a member variable.
    A m_a; 

public:
    B() { std::cout << "B\n"; }
};

int main() {
    B b;
    // "A\nB\n"
}
```

When variable `b` is constructed, the `B()` constructor is called. Before the body of the constructor executes, `m_a` is initialized, calling the class `A` default constructor. This prints “`A`”. Then control returns back to the `B` constructor, and the body of the `B` constructor executes.

This makes sense when you think about it, as the `B()` constructor may want to use variable `m_a` -- so `m_a` had better be initialized first!

The difference to the last example in the previous section is that `m_a` is a class-type. **class-type members get initialized *even if we don’t explicitly initialize them*.**

In the next lesson, we’ll talk about how to initialize these class member variables.


## Constructor notes

Many new programmers are confused about whether constructors create the objects or not. They do not -- **the compiler sets up the memory allocation for the object *prior to the constructor call***.

**Constructors actually serve two purposes.** 

- First, **constructors determine who is allowed to create an object**. That is, an object of a class can *only* be created if a matching constructor can be found.

- Second, **constructors can be used to initialize objects**. *Whether the constructor actually does an initialization is up to the programmer.* It’s syntactically valid to have a constructor that does no initialization at all (the constructor still serves the purpose of allowing the object to be created, as per the above).

    However, much like it is a best practice to initialize all local variables, **it’s also a best practice to initialize all member variables on creation of the object**. This can be done via a *constructor* or via *non-static member initialization*.

>**Best practice**  
Always initialize all member variables in your objects.

Finally, **constructors are only intended to be used for initialization when the object is created**. You should not try to call a constructor to re-initialize an existing object. *While it may compile, the results will not be what you intended (instead, the compiler will create a temporary object and then discard it).*
