---
title : "10.14 — Dynamically allocating arrays"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - new[]
    - delete[]
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---


In addition to dynamically allocating single values, we can also dynamically allocate arrays of variables. Unlike a fixed array, where the array size must be fixed at compile time, **dynamically allocating an array allows us to choose an array length *at runtime***.

To allocate an array dynamically, **we use the array form of new and delete** (often called `new[]` and `delete[]`):

```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    std::cout << "Enter a positive integer: ";
    int length{};
    std::cin >> length;

    // Use array new.
    // Note that length does not need to be constant!
    int* array{ new int[length] {} };

    std::cout << "I just allocated an array of integers of length "
        << length << '\n';

    // Set element 0 to value 5.
    array[0] = 5;

    // Use array delete to deallocate array.
    delete[] array;

    // We don't need to set array to nullptr/0 here
    // because it's going to go out of scope immediately
    // after this anyway.
}
```

Because we are allocating an array, **C++ knows that it should use the array version of `new`** instead of the scalar version of `new`. *Essentially, the `new[]` operator is called*, even though the `[]` isn’t placed next to the `new` keyword.

**The length of dynamically allocated arrays has to be a type that’s convertible to `std::size_t`.** In practice, using an `int` length is fine, since `int` will convert to `std::size_t`.

>**Author’s note**  
Some might argue that because array `new` expects a length of type `size_t`, our lengths (e.g. such as `length` in the example above) should either be of type `size_t` or converted to a `size_t` via `static_cast`.        
I find this argument uncompelling for a number of reasons. First, it contradicts the best practice to use signed integers over unsigned ones. Second, when creating dynamic arrays using an integral length, it’s convention to do something like this:  
```c++  
double* ptr { new double[5] };  
```  
`5` is an `int` literal, **so we get an implicit conversion to `size_t`**. Prior to `C++23`, there is no way to create a `size_t` literal without using `static_cast`! If the designers of C++ had intended us to strictly use `size_t` types here, they would have provided a way to create literals of type `size_t`.  
The most common counterargument is that some hyper-pedantic compiler might flag this as a signed/unsigned conversion error (since we always treat warnings as errors). However, it’s worth noting that GCC does not flag this as a signed/unsigned conversion error even when such warnings (`-Wconversion`) are enabled.  
While there is nothing wrong with using `size_t` as the length of a dynamically allocated array, in this tutorial series, we will not be pedantic about requiring it.

Note that because this memory is allocated from a different place than the memory used for fixed arrays, **the size of the array can be quite large**. You can run the program above and allocate an array of length 1,000,000 (or probably even 100,000,000) without issue. Try it! Because of this, programs that need to allocate a lot of memory in C++ typically do so dynamically.


## Dynamically deleting arrays

When deleting a dynamically allocated array, we have to use the array version of delete, which is `delete[]`.

This tells the CPU that it needs to clean up *multiple* variables instead of a single variable. One of the most common mistakes that new programmers make when dealing with dynamic memory allocation is to use `delete` instead of `delete[]` when deleting a dynamically allocated array. **Using the scalar version of delete on an array will result in undefined behavior**, such as data corruption, memory leaks, crashes, or other problems.

One often asked question of array `delete[]` is, “How does array delete know how much memory to delete?” The answer is that **array `new[]` keeps track of how much memory was allocated to a variable**, so that array `delete[]` can delete the proper amount. **Unfortunately, this size/length isn’t accessible to the programmer.**


## Dynamic arrays are almost identical to fixed arrays

In [lesson 10.8 -- Pointers and arrays](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/pointers-and-arrays/), you learned that **a fixed array holds the memory address of the first array element**. You also learned that **a fixed array can decay into a pointer *that points to the first element of the array***. In this decayed form, the length of the fixed array is not available (and therefore neither is the size of the array via `sizeof()`), but otherwise there is little difference.

A dynamic array *starts its life as a pointer* that points to the first element of the array. Consequently, **it has the same limitations** in that it *doesn’t* know its length or size. **A dynamic array *functions identically* to a decayed fixed array**, with the exception that the programmer is responsible for deallocating the dynamic array via the `delete[]` keyword.


## Initializing dynamically allocated arrays

If you want to initialize a dynamically allocated array to `0`, the syntax is quite simple:

```c++
int* array{ new int[length] {} };
```

Prior to `C++11`, there was no easy way to initialize a dynamic array to a non-zero value (initializer lists only worked for fixed arrays). This means you had to loop through the array and assign element values explicitly.

```c++
int* array = new int[5];
array[0] = 9;
array[1] = 7;
array[2] = 5;
array[3] = 3;
array[4] = 1;
```

Super annoying! However, **starting with `C++11`, it’s now possible to initialize dynamic arrays** using initializer lists!

```c++
// Initialize a fixed array before C++11.
int fixedArray[5] = { 9, 7, 5, 3, 1 };

// Initialize a dynamic array since C++11.
int* array{ new int[5]{ 9, 7, 5, 3, 1 } };

// To prevent writing the type twice, we can use auto.
// This is often done for types with long names.
auto* array{ new int[5]{ 9, 7, 5, 3, 1 } };
```

Note that **this syntax has no `operator=`** between the array length and the initializer list.

**For consistency, fixed arrays can also be initialized using uniform initialization:**

```c++
// Initialize a fixed array in C++11
int fixedArray[]{ 9, 7, 5, 3, 1 };

// Initialize a fixed array in C++11
char fixedArray[]{ "Hello, world!" };
```

**Explicitly stating the size of the array is optional.**


## Resizing arrays

Dynamically allocating an array allows you to set the array length at the time of allocation. However, **C++ does not provide a built-in way to resize an array that has already been allocated.** It is possible to work around this limitation by dynamically allocating a new array, copying the elements over, and deleting the old array. ***However, this is error prone, especially when the element type is a class (which have special rules governing how they are created).***

Consequently, we recommend avoiding doing this yourself.

Fortunately, if you need this capability, C++ provides a resizable array as part of the standard library called `std::vector`. We’ll introduce `std::vector` shortly.


## Quiz time

- **Q.** Write a program that:

    - Asks the user how many names they wish to enter.
    - Dynamically allocates a `std::string` array.
    - Asks the user to enter each name.
    - Calls `std::sort` to sort the names.
    - Prints the sorted list of names.

    `std::string` supports comparing strings via the comparison operators `<` and `>`. You don’t need to implement string comparison by hand.

- **A.**  

    ```c++
    #include <algorithm>    // std::sort
    #include <iostream>
    #include <limits>       // std::numeric_limits
    #include <string>

    int getNameCount() {
        std::cout << "How many names would you like to enter? ";
        int length{};
        std::cin >> length;

        return length;
    }

    // Asks user to enter all the names.
    void getNames(std::string* names, int length) {
        // Ignore the line feed that was left by std::cin.
        std::cin.ignore(std::numeric_limits<std::streamsize>::max(), '\n');

        for (int i{ 0 }; i < length; ++i) {
            std::cout << "Enter name #" << i + 1 << ": ";
            std::getline(std::cin >> std::ws, names[i]);
        }
    }

    // Prints the sorted names.
    void printNames(std::string* names, int length) {
        std::cout << "\nHere is your sorted list:\n";

        for (int i{ 0 }; i < length; ++i)
            std::cout << "Name #" << i + 1
            << ": " << names[i] << '\n';
    }

    int main() {
        int length{ getNameCount() };

        // Allocate an array to hold the names.
        auto* names{ new std::string[length]{} };

        getNames(names, length);

        // Sort the array.
        std::sort(names, names + length);

        printNames(names, length);

        // Don't forget to use array delete.
        delete[] names;
        names = nullptr;
    }
    ```

>**A reminder**  
You can use `std::getline()` to read in names that contain spaces (see [lesson 4.13 -- An introduction to `std::string`](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/an-introduction-to-stdstring/)).


>**A reminder**  
To use `std::sort()` with a pointer to an array, calculate begin and end manually