---
title : "M.04 — std::move"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - std::move
    - null state
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
last_modified_at: 2022-09-12
---


Once you start using move semantics more regularly, you’ll start to find cases where you want to invoke move semantics, **but the objects you have to work with are l-values**, not r-values. Consider the following swap function as an example:

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

template<class T>
void myswap(T& a, T& b) {
    T tmp{ a };     // Invokes copy constructor.
    a = b;          // Invokes copy assignment.
    b = tmp;        // Invokes copy assignment.
}

int main() {
    std::string x{ "abc" };
    std::string y{ "de" };

    std::cout << "x: " << x << '\n';
    std::cout << "y: " << y << '\n';

    myswap(x, y);

    std::cout << "x: " << x << '\n';
    std::cout << "y: " << y << '\n';
}
```

Passed in two objects of type `T` (in this case, `std::string`), this function swaps their values by making three copies. Consequently, this program prints:

```
x: abc
y: de
x: de
y: abc
```

*As we showed last lesson, making copies can be inefficient. And this version of swap makes 3 copies.* That leads to a lot of excessive string creation and destruction, which is slow.

However, doing copies isn’t necessary here. *All we’re really trying to do is swap the values of `a` and `b`, which can be accomplished just as well using 3 moves instead!* So if we switch from copy semantics to move semantics, we can make our code more performant.

But how? The problem here is that parameters `a` and `b` are l-value references, not r-value references, **so we don’t have a way to invoke the move constructor and move assignment operator instead of copy constructor and copy assignment**. By default, we get the copy constructor and copy assignment behaviors. What are we to do?


## std::move

In `C++11`, **`std::move`** is a standard library function that *casts (using `static_cast`) its argument into an r-value reference*, so that move semantics can be invoked. *Thus, we can use `std::move` to cast an l-value into a type that will prefer being moved over being copied.* `std::move` is defined in the `<utility>` header.

Here’s the same program as above, but with a `myswap()` function that uses `std::move` to convert our l-values into r-values so we can invoke move semantics:

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <utility>              // for std::move

template<class T>
void myswap(T& a, T& b) {
    T tmp{ std::move(a) };      // Invokes move constructor.
    a = std::move(b);           // Invokes move assignment.
    b = std::move(tmp);         // Invokes move assignment.
}

int main() {
    std::string x{ "abc" };
    std::string y{ "de" };

    std::cout << "x: " << x << '\n';
    std::cout << "y: " << y << '\n';

    myswap(x, y);

    std::cout << "x: " << x << '\n';
    std::cout << "y: " << y << '\n';
}
```

This prints the same result as above:

```
x: abc
y: de
x: de
y: abc
```

But it’s much more efficient about it. When `tmp` is initialized, instead of making a copy of `x`, we use `std::move` to convert l-value variable `x` into an r-value. Since the parameter is an r-value, move semantics are invoked, and `x` is moved into `tmp`.

With a couple of more swaps, the value of variable `x` has been moved to `y`, and the value of `y` has been moved to `x`.


## Another example

**We can also use `std::move` when filling elements of a container, such as `std::vector`, with l-values.**

In the following program, we first add an element to a vector using copy semantics. Then we add an element to the vector using move semantics.

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <utility>      // for std::move
#include <vector>

int main() {
    std::vector<std::string> v;
    std::string str{ "Knock" };

    std::cout << "Copying str\n";

    // Calls l-value version of push_back,
    // which copies str into the array element.
    v.push_back(str);

    std::cout << "str: " << str << '\n';
    std::cout << "vector: " << v[0] << '\n';

    std::cout << "\nMoving str\n";

    // Calls r-value version of push_back,
    // which moves str into the array element.
    v.push_back(std::move(str));

    std::cout << "str: " << str << '\n';
    std::cout << "vector:" << v[0] << ' ' << v[1] << '\n';
}
```

This program prints:

```
Copying str
str: Knock
vector: Knock

Moving str
str:
vector: Knock Knock
```

*In the first case*, we passed `push_back()` an l-value, so it used copy semantics to add an element to the vector. For this reason, the value in `str` is left alone.

*In the second case*, we passed `push_back()` an r-value (actually an l-value converted via `std::move()`), **so it used move semantics to add an element to the vector**. This is more efficient, as the vector element can steal the string’s value rather than having to copy it. **In this case, `str` is left empty**.

At this point, it’s worth reiterating that **`std::move()` gives a hint to the compiler that the programmer doesn’t need this object any more** (at least, not in its current state). Consequently, you should not use `std::move()` on any persistent object you don’t want to modify, and you should not expect the state of any objects that have had `std::move()` applied to be the same after they are moved!


## Move functions should always leave your objects in a well-defined state

As we noted in the previous lesson, it’s a good idea to always leave the objects being stolen from in some well-defined (deterministic) state. **Ideally, this should be a “null state”**, where the object is set back to its uninitialized or zero state. Now we can talk about why: **with `std::move`, the object being stolen from may not be a temporary after all**. The user may want to reuse this (now empty) object again, or test it in some way, and can plan accordingly.

In the above example, **string `str` is set to the empty string after being moved *(which is what `std::string` always does after a successful move)***. This allows us to reuse variable `str` if we wish (or we can ignore it, if we no longer have a use for it).


## Where else is std::move useful?

**`std::move` can also be useful when sorting an array of elements.** Many sorting algorithms (such as selection sort and bubble sort) work by swapping pairs of elements. In previous lessons, we’ve had to resort to copy-semantics to do the swapping. Now we can use move semantics, which is more efficient.

**It can also be useful if we want to move the contents managed by one smart pointer to another.**


## Conclusion

`std::move` can be used whenever we want to treat an l-value like an r-value for the purpose of invoking move semantics instead of copy semantics.