---
title : "07.xx — Chapter 7 summary and quiz"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---




## Quick review

The specific sequence of statements that the CPU executes in a program is called the program’s **execution path** (or **path**, for short). A **straight-line program** takes the same path every time it is run.

**Control flow statements** (also called **Flow control statements**) allow the programmer to change the normal path of execution. When a control flow statement causes the program to begin executings some non-sequential instruction sequence, this is called a **branch**.

A **conditional statement** is a statement that specifies whether some associated statement(s) should be executed or not.

**`if` statements** allow us to execute an associated statement based on whether some condition is true. **`else` statements** execute `if` the associated condition is false. You can chain together multiple `if` and `else` statements.

A **dangling `else`** occurs when it is ambiguous which `if` statement an `else` statement is connected to. Dangling else statements are matched up with the last unmatched if statement in the same block. Thus, we trivially avoid dangling else statements by ensuring the body of an `if` statement is placed in a block.

A **null statement** is a statement that consists of just a semicolon. It does nothing, and is used when the language requires a statement to exist but the programmer does not need the statement to do anything.

**`switch` statements** provide a cleaner and faster method for selecting between a number of matching items. Switch statements only work with integral types. **Case labels** are used to identify the values for the evaluated condition to match. The statements beneath a **default label** (often called the **default case**) are executed if no matching case label can be found.

>**For advanced readers**  
Why does the switch type only allow for integral (or enumerated) types? The answer is because switch statements are designed to be highly optimized. Historically, the most common way for compilers to implement switch statements is via a [Jump tables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Branch_table) -- and jump tables only work with integral values.  
For those of you already familiar with arrays, a jump table works much like an array, an integral value is used as the array index to “jump” directly to a result. This can be much more efficient than doing a bunch of sequential comparisons.  
Of course, compilers don’t have to implement switches using jump tables, and sometimes they don’t. There is technically no reason that C++ couldn’t relax the restriction so that other types could be used as well, they just haven’t done so yet (as of `C++20`).

When execution flows from a statement underneath a label into statements underneath a subsequent label, this is called **fallthrough**. A `break` statement (or `return` statement) can be used to prevent fallthrough. The `[[fallthrough]]` attribute can be used to document intentional fallthrough.

>**Attributes** are a modern C++ feature that allows the programmer to provide the compiler with some additional data about the code. To specify an attribute, the attribute name is placed between double hard braces. Attributes are not statements -- rather, they can be used almost anywhere where they are contextually relevant.

>Variable declaration and initialization inside case statements  
```c++
switch (1) {
    int a;      // okay: declaration is allowed before the case labels
    int b{ 5 }; // illegal: initialization is not allowed before the case labels
    case 1:
        int y;  // okay but bad practice: declaration is allowed within a case
        y = 4;  // okay: assignment is allowed
        break;
    case 2:
        y = 5;  // okay: y was declared above, so we can use it here too
        break;
    case 3:
        int z{ 4 }; // illegal: initialization is not allowed within a case
        break;
}
```

>**rule**  
If defining variables used in a `case` statement, do so in a block inside the case (or before the `switch` if appropriate)

**`goto` statements** allow the program to jump to somewhere else in the code, either forward or backwards (and the spot to jump to is identified through use of a **statement label**). These should generally be avoided, as they can create spaghetti code, which occurs when a program has a path of execution that resembles a bowl of spaghetti.

>Statement labels utilize a function scope, which means the label is visible throughout the function even before its point of declaration (you can’t jump out of one function and into another). No forward declaration of statement labels is necessary.

**`while` loops** allow the program to loop as long as a given condition evaluates to `true`. The condition is evaluated before the loop executes.

An **infinite loop** is a loop that has a condition that always evaluates to true. These loops will loop forever unless another control flow statement is used to stop them.

>**Best practice**  
Favor `while(true)` for intentional infinite loops.

A **loop variable** (also called a **counter**) is an integer variable used to count how many times a loop has executed. Each execution of a loop is called an **iteration**.

>**Best practice**  
Loop variables should be of type (signed) `int`.

**`do` `while` loops** are similar to while loops, but the condition is evaluated after the loop executes instead of before.

>**Best practice**  
Favor while loops over do-while when given an equal choice.

**`for` statement** (also called a **`for` loop**) are the most used loop, and are ideal when you need to loop a specific number of times. An **off-by-one error** occurs when the loop iterates one too many or one too few times.

>**Best practice**  
Defining multiple variables (in the init-statement) and using the comma operator (in the end-expression) is acceptable inside a `for` statement.

>**Best practice**  
- Prefer `for` loops over `while` loops when there is an obvious loop variable.  
- Prefer `while` loops over `for` loops when there is no obvious loop variable.

**Break statements** allow us to break out of a `switch`, `while`, `do` `while`, or `for` loop (also range-based `for` loops, which we haven’t covered yet). **Continue statements** allow us to move immediately to the next loop iteration.

>**Best practice**  
- Use `break` and `continue` when they simplify your loop logic.  
- Use **early returns** when they simplify your function’s logic.

**Halts** allow us to terminate our program. **Normal termination** means the program has exited in an expected way (and the status code will indicate whether it succeeded or not). **`std::exit()`** is automatically called at the end of main, or it can be called explicitly to terminate the program. It does some cleanup, but does not cleanup any local variables, or unwind the call stack.

**Abnormal termination** occurs when the program encountered some kind of unexpected error and had to be shut down. **`std::abort`** can be called for an abnormal termination.

**Scope creep** occurs when a project’s capabilities grow beyond what was originally intended at the start of the project or project phase.

**Software verification** (a.k.a. **software testing**) is the process of testing whether or not the software works as expected in all cases. A **unit test** is a test designed to test a small portion of the code (typically a function or call) in isolation to ensure a particular behavior occurs as expected. **Unit test frameworks** can help you organize your unit tests. **Integration testing** tests the integration of a bunch of units together to ensure they work properly.

**Code coverage** refers to how much of the source code is executed while testing. **Statement coverage** refers to the percentage of statements in a program that have been exercised by testing routines. **Branch coverage** refers to the percentage of branches that have been executed by testing routines. **Loop coverage** (also called the **0, 1, 2 test**) means that if you have a loop, you should ensure it works properly when it iterates 0 times, 1 time, and 2 times.

The **happy path** is the path of execution that occurs when there are no errors encountered. A **sad path** is one where an error or failure state occurs. A **non-recoverable error** (also called a **fatal error**) is an error that is severe enough that the program can’t continue running. A program that handles error cases well is **robust**.

A **buffer** is a piece of memory set aside for storing data temporarily while it is moved from one place to another.

The process of checking whether user input conforms to what the program is expecting is called **input validation**.

**`std::cerr`** is an output stream (like `std::cout`) designed to be used for error messages.

A **precondition** is any condition that must always be true prior to the execution of some segment of code. An **invariant** is a condition that must be true while some component is executing. A **postcondition** is any condition that must always be true after the execution of some code.

An **assertion** is an expression that will be true unless there is a bug in the program. In C++, runtime assertions are typically implemented using the `assert` preprocessor macro. Assertions are usually turned off in non-debug code. A **`static_assert`** is an assertion that is evaluated at compile-time.

Assertions should be used to document cases that should be logically impossible. **Error handling** should be used to handle cases that are possible.

An **algorithm** is a finite sequence of instructions that can be followed to solve some problem or produce some useful result. An algorithm is considered to be **stateful** if it retains some information across calls. Conversely, a **stateless** algorithm does not store any information (and must be given all the information it needs to work with when it is called). When applied to algorithms, the term **state** refers to the current values held in stateful variables.

An algorithm is considered **deterministic** if for a given input (the value provided for start) it will always produce the same output sequence.

A **pseudo-random number generator** (**PRNG**) is an algorithm that generates a sequence of numbers whose properties simulate a sequence of random numbers. When a PRNG is instantiated, an initial value (or set of values) called a **random seed** (or **seed** for short) can be provided to initialize the state of the PRNG. When a PRNG has been initialized with a seed, we say it has been **seeded**. The size of the seed value can be smaller than the size of the state of the PRNG. When this happens, we say the PRNG has been **underseeded**. The length of the sequence before a PRNG begins to repeat itself is known as the **period**.

A **random number distribution** converts the output of a PRNG into some other distribution of numbers. A **uniform distribution** is a random number distribution that produces outputs between two numbers X and Y (inclusive) with equal probability.