---
title : "06.07 — External linkage"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - external linkage
    - external variable
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
last_modified_at: 2022-06-06
---


In the prior lesson ([6.6 -- Internal linkage](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/internal-linkage/)), we discussed how **internal linkage** limits the use of an identifier to a single file. In this lesson, we’ll explore the concept of external linkage.

An identifier with **external linkage** can be seen and used both from the file in which it is defined, and from other code files (via a forward declaration). In this sense, identifiers with external linkage are truly “global” in that they can be used anywhere in your program!


## Functions have external linkage by default

In [lesson 2.7 -- Programs with multiple code files](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/programs-with-multiple-code-files/), you learned that you can call a function defined in one file from another file. **This is because functions have external linkage by default.**

**In order to call a function defined in another file, you must place a forward declaration for the function in any other files wishing to use the function.** *The forward declaration tells the compiler about the existence of the function, and the linker connects the function calls to the actual function definition.*


## Global variables with external linkage

Global variables with external linkage are sometimes called **external variables**. To make a global variable external (and thus accessible by other files), we can use the `extern` keyword to do so:

```c++
// Non-constant globals are external by default.
int g_x{ 2 };

// Const globals can be defined as extern, making them external.
extern const int g_y{ 3 };

// Constexpr globals can be defined as extern,
// making them external 
// (but this is useless, see the note in the next section).
extern constexpr int g_z{ 3 };

int main() {}
```

**Non-const global variables are external by default** (if used, the `extern` keyword will be ignored).


## Variable forward declarations via the `extern` keyword

**To actually use an external global variable that has been defined in another file, you also must place a forward declaration for the global variable in any other files wishing to use the variable.** *For variables, creating a forward declaration is also done via the `extern` keyword (with no initialization value).*

Here is an example of using a variable forward declaration:

`a.cpp`:

```c++
// global variable definitions:

// Non-constant globals have external linkage by default.
int g_x{ 2 };              
// This extern gives g_y external linkage.
extern const int g_y{ 3 }; 
```

`main.cpp`:

```c++
#include <iostream>

// This extern is a forward declaration of a variable named g_x
// that is defined somewhere else
extern int g_x; 

// This extern is a forward declaration of a const variable named g_y
// that is defined somewhere else
extern const int g_y; 

int main() { std::cout << g_x; }
// "2"
```

*In the above example, `a.cpp` and `main.cpp` both reference the same global variable named `g_x`. So even though `g_x` is defined and initialized in `a.cpp`, we are able to use its value in `main.cpp` via the forward declaration of `g_x`.*

**Note that the extern keyword has different meanings in different contexts.** *In some contexts*, extern means “give this variable external linkage”. *In other contexts*, extern means “this is a forward declaration for an external variable that is defined somewhere else”. Yes, this is confusing, so we summarize all of these usages in [lesson 6.11 -- Scope, duration, and linkage summary](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/scope-duration-and-linkage-summary/).

>**Warning**  
If you want to define an uninitialized non-const global variable, do not use the `extern` keyword, otherwise C++ will think you’re trying to make a forward declaration for the variable.

>**Warning**  
Although constexpr variables can be given external linkage via the `extern` keyword, they can not be forward declared, so there is no value in giving them external linkage.

**Note that function forward declarations don’t need the `extern` keyword** -- the compiler is able to tell whether you’re defining a new function or making a forward declaration based on whether you supply a function body or not. Variables forward declarations do need the `extern` keyword to help differentiate variables definitions from variable forward declarations (they look otherwise identical):


```c++
// non-constant:

// variable definition (can have initializer if desired)
int g_x;
// forward declaration (no initializer)
extern int g_x;


// constant:

// variable definition (const requires initializers)
extern const int g_y{ 1 };
// forward declaration (no initializer)
extern const int g_y;
```


## File scope vs. global scope

The terms “file scope” and “global scope” tend to cause confusion, and this is partly due to the way they are informally used. **Technically, in C++, all global variables have “file scope”, and the linkage property controls whether they can be used in other files or not.**

Consider the following program:

`global.cpp`:

```c++
// external linkage by default
int g_x{ 2 }; 

// g_x goes out of scope here.
```

`main.cpp`:

```c++
// forward declaration for g_x
// -- g_x can be used beyond this point in this file.
extern int g_x; 

int main() { std::cout << g_x; }    // "2"

// the forward declaration for g_x goes out of scope here
```

Variable `g_x` has file scope within `global.cpp` -- it can be used from the point of definition to the end of the file, but it can not be directly seen outside of `global.cpp`.

**Inside `main.cpp`, the forward declaration of `g_x` also has file scope -- it can be used from the point of declaration to the end of the file.**

*However, informally, the term “file scope” is more often applied to global variables with internal linkage, and “global scope” to global variables with external linkage (since they can be used across the whole program, with the appropriate forward declarations).*


## Quick summary

```c++
// External global variable definitions:

// Defines non-initialized external global variable
// (zero initialized by default).
int g_x;
// Defines initialized const external global variable.
extern const int g_x{ 1 };
// Defines initialized constexpr external global variable.
extern constexpr int g_x{ 2 };


// Forward declarations:

// forward declaration for non-constant global variable
extern int g_y;
// forward declaration for const global variable
extern const int g_y;
// not allowed! Constexpr variables can't be forward declared.
extern constexpr int g_y;
```


## Quiz time

>**Q.** What’s the difference between a variable’s scope, duration, and linkage? What kind of scope, duration, and linkage do global variables have?  

>**A.**  
- **Scope** determines where a variable is accessible. **Duration** determines where a variable is created and destroyed. **Linkage** determines whether the variable can be exported to another file or not.  
- Global variables have **global scope** (aka. **file scope**), which means they can be accessed from the point of declaration to the end of the file in which they are declared.  
- Global variables have **static duration**, which means they are created when the program is started, and destroyed when it ends.  
- Global variables can have either **internal or external linkage**, via the `static` and extern `keywords` respectively.  