---
permalink: /LearnCpp/
title : "06.02 — User-defined namespaces and the scope resolution operator"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - user-defined namespace
    - scope resolution operator
    - namespace alias
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---



## Defining your own namespaces

C++ allows us to define our own namespaces via the `namespace` keyword. Namespaces that you create for your own declarations are called **user-defined namespaces**. Namespaces provided by C++ (such as the global namespace) or by libraries (such as namespace `std`) are not considered user-defined namespaces.

Namespace identifiers are typically non-capitalized.


## Accessing a namespace with the scope resolution operator (`::`)

The best way to tell the compiler to look in a particular namespace for an identifier is to use the **scope resolution operator** (`::`). The scope resolution operator tells the compiler that the identifier specified by the right-hand operand should be looked for in the scope of the left-hand operand.

The scope resolution operator is great because it allows us to explicitly pick which namespace we want to look in, so there’s no potential ambiguity.


## Using the scope resolution operator with no name prefix

**The scope resolution operator can also be used in front of an identifier *without providing a namespace name (e.g. `::doSomething`)*.** In such a case, the identifier (e.g. `doSomething`) is looked for in the global namespace.

```c++
#include <iostream>

// This print lives in the global namespace .
void print() { std::cout << " there\n"; }

// this print lives in the foo namespace
namespace foo {
    void print() { std::cout << "Hello"; }
}

int main() {

    // Call print() in foo namespace.
	foo::print();   

    // Call print() in global namespace
    // (same as just calling print() in this case).
    ::print();      
}
```

In the above example, the `::print()` performs the same as if we’d called `print()` with no scope resolution, so use of the scope resolution operator is superfluous in this case. But the next example will show a case where the scope resolution operator with no namespace can be useful.


## Identifier resolution from within a namespace

If an identifier inside a namespace is used and no scope resolution is provided, the compiler will first try to find a matching declaration in that same namespace. If no matching identifier is found, the compiler will then check each containing namespace in sequence to see if a match is found, with the global namespace being checked last.

```c++
#include <iostream>

// This print lives in the global namespace.
void print() { std::cout << " there\n"; }

namespace foo {

    // This print lives in the foo namespace.
    void print() { std::cout << "Hello"; }

    void printHelloThere() {

        // Calls print() in foo namespace.
        print();    

        // Calls print() in global namespace.
        ::print();  
    }
}

int main() { foo::printHelloThere(); }
// "Hello there"
```

In the above example, `print()` is called with no scope resolution provided. **Because this use of `print()` is inside the `foo` namespace, the compiler will first see if a declaration for `foo::print()` can be found.** Since one exists, `foo::print()` is called.

**If `foo::print()` had not been found, the compiler would have checked the containing namespace** (in this case, the global namespace) to see if it could match a `print()` there.

*Note that we also make use of the scope resolution operator with no namespace (`::print()`) to explicitly call the global version of `print()`.*


## Multiple namespace blocks are allowed

**It’s legal to declare namespace blocks in multiple locations** (either across multiple files, or multiple places within the same file). *All declarations within the namespace are considered part of the namespace.*

`circle.h`:

```c++
#ifndef CIRCLE_H
#define CIRCLE_H

namespace basicMath {
    constexpr double pi{ 3.14 };
}

#endif
```

`growth.h`:

```c++
#ifndef GROWTH_H
#define GROWTH_H

namespace basicMath {

    // The constant e is also part of namespace basicMath.
    constexpr double e{ 2.7 };
}

#endif
```

`main.cpp`:

```c++
#include "circle.h" // for basicMath::pi
#include "growth.h" // for basicMath::e

#include <iostream>

int main() {
    std::cout << basicMath::pi << '\n';
    std::cout << basicMath::e << '\n';
}
```

**The standard library makes extensive use of this feature, as each standard library header file contains its declarations inside a namespace `std` block contained within that header file.** Otherwise the entire standard library would have to be defined in a single header file!

Note that this capability also means you could add your own functionality to the `std` namespace. **Doing so causes undefined behavior most of the time, because the `std` namespace has a special rule, prohibiting extension from user code.**

>**Warning**  
Do not add custom functionality to the `std` namespace.

**When you separate your code into multiple files, you’ll have to use a namespace *in the header and source file*.**

`add.h`

```c++
#ifndef ADD_H
#define ADD_H

namespace basicMath {

    // Function add() is part of namespace basicMath.
    int add(int x, int y);
}

#endif
```

`add.cpp`

```c++
#include "add.h"

namespace basicMath {

    // Define the function add().
    int add(int x, int y) { return x + y; }
}
```

`main.cpp`

```c++
#include "add.h"    // for basicMath::add()

#include <iostream>

int main() {
    std::cout << basicMath::add(4, 3) << '\n';
}
```

*If the namespace is omitted in the source file*, the linker won’t find a definition of `basicMath::add`, because the source file only defines `add` (global namespace). *If the namespace is omitted in the header file*, “`main.cpp`” won’t be able to use `basicMath::add`, because it only sees a declaration for `add` (global namespace).


## Nested namespaces

**Namespaces can be nested inside other namespaces.** For example:

```c++
#include <iostream>

namespace foo {

    // goo is a namespace inside the foo namespace.
    namespace goo { 
        int add(int x, int y) { return x + y; }
    }
}

int main() {
    std::cout << foo::goo::add(1, 2) << '\n';
}
```

Note that because namespace `goo` is inside of namespace `foo`, we access add as `foo::goo::add`.

Since `C++17`, nested namespaces can also be declared this way:

```c++
#include <iostream>

// goo is a namespace inside the foo namespace 
// (C++17 style) 
namespace foo::goo { 
    int add(int x, int y) { return x + y; }
}

int main() {
    std::cout << foo::goo::add(1, 2) << '\n';
}
```


## Namespace aliases

Because typing the fully qualified name of a variable or function inside a nested namespace can be painful, C++ allows you to create **namespace aliases**, which allow us to temporarily shorten a long sequence of namespaces into something shorter:

```c++
#include <iostream>

namespace foo::goo {
    int add(int x, int y) { return x + y; }
}

int main() {

    // active now refers to foo::goo.
    namespace active = foo::goo; 

    // This is really foo::goo::add()
    std::cout << active::add(1, 2) << '\n'; 

}   // The active alias ends here.
```

One nice advantage of namespace aliases: **If you ever want to move the functionality within `before` to a different place, you can just update the `active` alias to reflect the new destination**, rather than having to find/replace every instance of `before`.

```c++
#include <iostream>

namespace before {
    int add(int x, int y) { return x + y; }
}

namespace after {}

int main() {
    namespace active = before; 

    std::cout << active::add(1, 2) << '\n'; 
}   
```

```c++
#include <iostream>

namespace before {}

namespace after {
    int add(int x, int y) { return x + y; }
}

int main() {

    // active now refers to after.
    namespace active = after; 

    // We don't have to change this!
    std::cout << active::add(1, 2) << '\n'; 
}
```

It’s worth noting that **namespaces in C++ were not originally designed as a way to implement an information hierarchy** -- they were designed primarily as a mechanism for preventing naming collisions. As evidence of this, note that the entirety of the standard library lives under the singular namespace `std::` (with some nested namespaces used for newer library features). Some newer languages (such as C#) differ from C++ in this regard.

**In general, you should avoid deeply nested namespaces.**


## When you should use namespaces

**In applications, namespaces can be used to separate application-specific code from code that might be reusable later** (e.g. math functions). For example, physical and math functions could go into one namespace (e.g. `math::`). Language and localization functions in another (e.g. `lang::`).

**When you write a library or code that you want to distribute to others, always place your code inside a namespace.** 
- The code your library is used in may not follow best practices -- in such a case, if your library’s declarations aren’t in a namespace, there’s an elevated chance for naming conflicts to occur. 
- As an additional advantage, placing library code inside a namespace also allows the user to see the contents of your library by using their editor’s auto-complete and suggestion feature.
