---
title : "06.xx — Chapter 6 summary and quiz"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---


## Quick review

We covered a lot of material in this chapter. Good job, you’re doing great!

A **compound statement** or **block** is a group of zero or more statements that is treated by the compiler as if it were a single statement. Blocks begin with a `{` symbol, end with a `}` symbol, with the statements to be executed placed in between. Blocks can be used anywhere a single statement is allowed. No semicolon is needed at the end of a block. Blocks are often used in conjunction with if statements to execute multiple statements.

**User-defined namespaces** are namespaces that are defined by you for your own declarations. Namespaces provided by C++ (such as the global namespace) or by libraries (such as namespace `std`) are not considered user-defined namespaces.

You can access a declaration in a namespace via the **scope resolution operator** (`::`). The scope resolution operator tells the compiler that identifier specified by the right-hand operand should be looked for in the scope of the left-hand operand. If no left-hand operand is provided, the global namespace is assumed.

**Local variables** are variables defined within a function (including function parameters). Local variables have **block scope**, meaning they are **in-scope** from their point of definition to the end of the block they are defined within. Local variables have **automatic storage duration**, meaning they are created at the point of definition and destroyed at the end of the block they are defined in.

A name declared in a nested block can **shadow** or **name hide** an identically named variable in an outer block. This should be avoided.

**Global variables** are variables defined outside of a function. Global variables have **file scope**, which means they are visible from the point of declaration until the end of the file in which they are declared. Global variables have **static duration**, which means they are created when the program starts, and destroyed when it ends. ***Avoid dynamic initialization of static variables whenever possible.***

An identifier’s **linkage** determines whether other declarations of that name refer to the same object or not. Local variables have **no linkage**. Identifiers with **internal linkage** can be seen and used within a single file, but it is not accessible from other files. Identifiers with **external linkage** can be seen and used both from the file in which it is defined, and from other code files (via a forward declaration).

Avoid non-const global variables whenever possible. Const globals are generally seen as acceptable. Use **inline variables** for global constants if your compiler is C++17 capable.

Local variables can be given static duration via the `static` keyword.

Using statements (including **using declarations** and **using directives**) can be used to avoid having to qualify identifiers with an explicit namespace. These should generally be avoided.

Finally, C++ supports **unnamed namespaces**, which implicitly treat all contents of the namespace as if it had internal linkage. C++ also supports **inline namespaces**, which provide some primitive versioning capabilities for namespaces.


## Quiz time

