---
title : "10.08 — Introduction to pointers"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---



In [lesson 1.3](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-objects-and-variables/) -- a first look at variables, we noted that a **variable** is a name for a piece of memory that holds a value. **When our program instantiates a variable, a free memory address is automatically assigned to the variable, and any value we assign to the variable is stored in this memory address.**

For example:

```c++
int x{};
```

When this statement is executed by the CPU, a piece of memory from RAM will be set aside. For the sake of example, let’s say that the variable x is assigned memory location 140. Whenever the program sees the variable x in an expression or statement, it knows that it should look in memory location 140 to get the value.

The nice thing about variables is that we don’t need to worry about what specific memory address is assigned. **We just refer to the variable by its given identifier, and the compiler translates this name into the appropriately assigned memory address.**

However, this approach has some limitations, which we’ll discuss in this and future lessons.

## The address-of operator (`&`)


## The indirection operator (`*`)

**The indirection operator** (`*`) (also called **dereference operator**) allows us to access the value at a particular address:


## Pointers

```c++
int* iPtr{}; // a pointer to an integer value
double* dPtr{}; // a pointer to a double value

int *iPtr2{}; // also valid syntax
int * iPtr3{}; // also valid syntax (but don't do this, it looks like multiplication)

// When declaring multiple variables in one line, the asterisk has to appear
// once for every variable.
int *iPtr4{}, *iPtr5{}; // declare two pointers to integer variables (not recommended)
```

## Declaring a pointer


>**Best practice**  
- When declaring a pointer variable, put the asterisk next to the type to make it easier to distinguish it from an indirection.

**Just like normal variables, pointers are not initialized when declared. If not initialized with a value, they will contain garbage.**

One note on pointer nomenclature: **“X pointer”** (where X is some type) is a commonly used shorthand for “pointer to an X”. So when we say, “an integer pointer”, we really mean “a pointer to an integer”.


## Assigning a value to a pointer


## The address-of operator returns a pointer

It’s worth noting that **the address-of operator** (`&`) doesn’t return the address of its operand as a literal. **Instead, it returns a pointer containing the address of the operand, whose type is derived from the argument** (e.g. taking the address of an int will return the address in an int pointer).

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <typeinfo>   // for typeid()

int main() {
	int x{ 4 };
	std::cout << typeid(&x).name() << '\n'; // "int *" or "Pi"
}
```

## Indirection through pointers


## A warning about indirection through invalid pointers


## The size of pointers


## What good are pointers?


## Conclusion


## Quiz time
