---
title : "02.08 — Naming collisions and an introduction to namespaces"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---



C++ requires that all identifiers *be* non-ambiguous. If two identical identifiers are introduced into the same program in a way that the compiler or linker can’t tell them apart, the compiler or linker will produce an error. This error is generally referred to as a **naming collision** (or **naming conflict**).


## An example of a naming collision

`a.cpp`:

```c++
#include <iostream>

void myFcn(int x) {
    std::cout << x;
}
```

`main.cpp`:

```c++
#include <iostream>

void myFcn(int x) {
    std::cout << 2 * x;
}

int main() { return 0; }
```

When the compiler compiles this program, it will compile `a.cpp` and `main.cpp` independently, and each file will compile with no problems.

However, when the linker executes, it will link all the definitions in `a.cpp` and `main.cpp` together, and discover conflicting definitions for function `myFcn`. The linker will then abort with an error. **Note that this error occurs even though `myFcn` is never called!**

Most naming collisions occur in two cases:
- Two (or more) definitions for a function (or global variable) are introduced into separate files that are compiled into the same program. This will result in a linker error, as shown above.
- Two (or more) definitions for a function (or global variable) are introduced into the same file (often via an #include). This will result in a compiler error.

As programs get larger and use more identifiers, the odds of a naming collision being introduced increases significantly. The good news is that C++ provides plenty of mechanisms for avoiding naming collisions. Local scope, which keeps local variables defined inside functions from conflicting with each other, is one such mechanism. But local scope doesn’t work for function names. So how do we keep function names from conflicting with each other?


## What is a namespace?

A **namespace** is a region that allows you to declare names inside of it for the purpose of disambiguation. The namespace provides a scope (called **namespace scope**) to the names declared inside of it -- which simply means that any name declared inside the namespace won’t be mistaken for identical names in other scopes.

>**Key insight**  
A name declared in a namespace won’t be mistaken for an identical name declared in another scope.

Within a namespace, all names *must* be unique, otherwise a naming collision will result.

Namespaces are often used to group related identifiers in a large project to help ensure they don’t inadvertently collide with other identifiers. For example, if you put all your math functions in a namespace called `math`, then your math functions won’t collide with identically named functions outside the `math` namespace.

We’ll talk about how to create your own namespaces in a future lesson.


## The global namespace

In C++, any name that is not defined inside a class, function, or a namespace is considered to be part of an implicitly defined namespace called the **global namespace** (sometimes also called the **global scope**).

In the example at the top of the lesson, functions `main()` and both versions of `myFcn()` are defined inside the global namespace. The naming collision encountered in the example happens because both versions of `myFcn()` end up inside the global namespace, which violates the rule that all names in the namespace must be unique.


## The `std` namespace

When C++ was originally designed, all of the identifiers in the C++ standard library (including `std::cin` and `std::cout`) were available to be used without the `std::` prefix (they were part of the global namespace). However, this meant that any identifier in the standard library could potentially conflict with any name you picked for your own identifiers (also defined in the global namespace). Code that was working might suddenly have a naming conflict when you #included a new file from the standard library. Or worse, programs that would compile under one version of C++ might not compile under a future version of C++, as new identifiers introduced into the standard library could have a naming conflict with already written code. So C++ moved all of the functionality in the standard library into a namespace named “`std`” (short for standard).

It turns out that `std::cout`’s name isn’t really `std::cout`. It’s actually just `cout`, and `std` is the name of the namespace that identifier `cout` is part of. Because `cout` is defined in the std namespace, the name `cout` won’t conflict with any objects or functions named `cout` that we create in the global namespace.

Similarly, when accessing an identifier that is defined in a namespace (e.g. `std::cout`) , you need to tell the compiler that we’re looking for an identifier defined inside the namespace (`std`).

>**Key insight**  
When you use an identifier that is defined inside a namespace (such as the `std` namespace), you have to tell the compiler that the identifier lives inside the namespace.

There are a few different ways to do this.


### - Explicit namespace qualifier `std::`

The most straightforward way to tell the compiler that we want to use `cout` from the `std` namespace is by explicitly using the `std::` prefix.

The `::` symbol is an operator called the **scope resolution operator**. The identifier to the left of the `::` symbol identifies the namespace that the name to the right of the `::` symbol is contained within. If no identifier to the left of the `::` symbol is provided, the global namespace is assumed.

So when we say `std::cout`, we’re saying “the cout that lives in namespace `std`“.

This is the safest way to use cout, because there’s no ambiguity about which `cout` we’re referencing (the one in the `std` namespace).

>**Best practice**  
Use explicit namespace prefixes to access identifiers defined in a namespace.


### - Using namespace std (and why to avoid it)

Another way to access identifiers inside a namespace is to use a using directive statement. Here’s our original “Hello world” program with a using directive:

```c++
#include <iostream>

// this is a using directive telling the compiler
// to check the std namespace
// when resolving identifiers with no prefix
using namespace std; 

int main() {
    // cout has no prefix, so the compiler will check
    // to see if cout is defined locally or in namespace std
    cout << "Hello world!"; 
}
```

A **`using` directive** tells the compiler to check a specified namespace when trying to resolve an identifier that has no namespace prefix. So in the above example, when the compiler goes to determine what identifier `cout` is, it will check both locally (where it is undefined) and in the `std` namespace (where it will match to `std::cout`).

Many texts, tutorials, and even some compilers recommend or use a `using` directive at the top of the program. However, used in this way, this is a bad practice, and highly discouraged.

Consider the following program:

```c++
#include <iostream> // imports the declaration of std::cout

using namespace std; // makes std::cout accessible as "cout"

// declares our own "cout" function 
int cout() {
    return 5;
}

int main() {
    // Compile error!  Which cout do we want here?
    // The one in the std namespace or the one we defined above?
    cout << "Hello, world!"; 
}
```

The above program doesn’t compile, because the compiler now can’t tell whether we want the `cout` function that we defined, or the `cout` that is defined inside the `std` namespace.

When using a `using` directive in this manner, any identifier we define may conflict with any identically named identifier in the `std` namespace. Even worse, while an identifier name may not conflict today, it may conflict with new identifiers added to the `std` namespace in future language revisions. This was the whole point of moving all of the identifiers in the standard library into the `std` namespace in the first place!


>**Warning**  
Avoid `using` directives (such as `using namespace std;`) at the top of your program. They violate the reason why namespaces were added in the first place.


We’ll talk more about using statements (and how to use them responsibly) in [lesson 6.12 -- Using declarations and using directives](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/using-declarations-and-using-directives/).

