---
title : "B.1 — Introduction to C++11"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---


What is C++11?

On August 12, 2011, the ISO (International Organization for Standardization) approved a new version of C++, called C++11. C++11 adds a whole new set of features to the C++ language! Use of these new features is entirely optional -- but you will undoubtedly find some of them helpful. The prior tutorials have all been updated to be C++11 compliant.

The goals and designs of C++11

Bjarne Stroustrup characterized the goals of C++11 as such:

Build on C++’s strengths -- rather than trying to extend C++ to new areas where it may be weaker (eg. Windows applications with heavy GUI), focus on making it do what it does well even better.
Make C++ easier to learn, use, and teach -- provide functionality that makes the language more consistent and easier to use.
To that end, the committee that put the language together tried to obey the following general principles:

Maintain stability and compatibility with older versions of C++ and C wherever possible. Programs that worked under C++03 should generally still work under C++11.
Keep the number of core language extensions to a minimum, and put the bulk of the changes in the standard library (an objective that wasn’t met very well with this release)
Focus on improving abstraction mechanisms (classes, templates) rather than adding mechanisms to handle specific, narrow situations.
Add new functionality for both novices and experts. A little of something for everybody!
Increase type safety, to prevent inadvertent bugs.
Improve performance and allow C++ to work directly with hardware.
Consider usability and ecosystem issues. C++ needs to work well with other tools, be easy to use and teach, etc…
C++11 isn’t a large departure from C++03 thematically, but it did add a huge amount of new functionality.

Major new features in C++11

For your interest, here’s a list of the major features that C++11 adds. Note that this list is not comprehensive, but rather intended to highlight some of the key features of interest.

auto (8.7 -- Type deduction for objects using the auto keyword)
char16_t and char32_t and new literals to support them (no tutorial yet)
constexpr (4.15 -- Const, constexpr, and symbolic constants)
decltype (no tutorial yet)
default specifier (no tutorial yet)
Delegating constructors (12.8 -- Overlapping and delegating constructors)
delete specifier (13.14 -- Converting constructors, explicit, and delete)
Enum classes (9.3 -- Enum classes)
Extern templates (no tutorial yet)
Lambda expressions (11.13 -- Introduction to lambdas (anonymous functions)) and captures (11.14 -- Lambda captures)
long long int (4.3 -- Object sizes and the sizeof operator)
Move constructor and assignment (M.3 -- Move constructors and move assignment)
Noexcept specifier (quick mention in 20.4 -- Uncaught exceptions and catch-all handlers)
nullptr (10.9 -- Null pointers)
override and final specifiers(18.3 -- The override and final specifiers, and covariant return types)
Range-based for statements (10.19 -- For-each loops)
r-value references (M.2 -- R-value references)
static_assert (7.17 -- Assert and static_assert)
std::initializer_list (16.7 -- std::initializer_list)
Trailing return type syntax (8.7 -- Type deduction for objects using the auto keyword)
Type aliases (8.6 -- Typedefs and type aliases)
typedef can now typedef template classes
Uniform initialization (4.1 -- Introduction to fundamental data types)
User-defined literals (no tutorial yet)
Variadic templates (no tutorial yet)
>> will now properly be interpreted as closing a template object
There are also many new classes in the C++ standard library available for use.

Better support for multi-threading and thread-local storage (no tutorial yet)
Hash tables (no tutorial yet)
Random number generation improvements (basic discussion in 9.5 -- Random number generation)
Reference wrappers (18.9 -- Object slicing)
Regular expressions (no tutorial yet)
std::auto_ptr has been deprecated (M.1 -- Intro to smart pointers and move semantics)
std::tuple (quick mention at 11.5 -- Returning values by value, reference, and address)
std::unique_ptr (M.6 -- std::unique_ptr)