---
title : "10.02 — Unscoped enumerations"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - enumeration, enumerated type, enum
    - enumerator
    - unscoped enumeration
    - scoped enumeration
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---

recent check: 3/2/2022



C++ contains many useful fundamental and compound data types (which we introduced in [lessons 4.1 -- Introduction to fundamental data types](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-fundamental-data-types/) and [4.11 -- Chars](https://www.learncpp.com/?p=12159)). But these types aren’t always sufficient for the kinds of things we want to do.

For example, let’s say you’re writing a program that needs to keep track of whether an apple is red, yellow, or green, or what color a shirt is (from a preset list of colors). If only fundamental types were available, how might you do this?

You might store the color as an integer value, using some kind of implicit mapping (0 = red , 1 = green, 2 = blue):

```c++
int main() {
    int appleColor{ 0 };    // my apple is red
    int shirtColor{ 1 };    // my shirt is green
}
```

But this isn’t at all intuitive, and we’ve already discussed why magic numbers are bad ([4.15 -- Symbolic constants: const and constexpr variables](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/const-constexpr-and-symbolic-constants/)). We can get rid of the magic numbers by using symbolic constants:

```c++
constexpr int red{ 0 };
constexpr int green{ 1 };
constexpr int blue{ 2 };

int main() {
    int appleColor{ red };
    int shirtColor{ green };
}
```

While this is a bit better for reading, the programmer is still left to deduce that `appleColor` and `shirtColor` (which are of type `int`) are meant to hold one of the values defined in the set of color symbolic constants (which are likely defined elsewhere, probably in a separate file).

We can make this program a little more clear by using a type alias:

```c++
// Define a type alias named color_t.
using color_t = int;

// The following color values should be used for a color_t.
constexpr color_t red{ 0 };
constexpr color_t green{ 1 };
constexpr color_t blue{ 2 };

int main() {
    color_t appleColor{ red };
    color_t shirtColor{ green };
}
```

We’re getting closer. Someone reading this code still has to understand that these color symbolic constants are meant to be used with variables of type `color_t`, but at least the type has a unique name now so someone searching for `color_t` would be able to find the set of associated symbolic constants.

However, because `color_t` is just an alias for an `int`, **we still have the problem that nothing enforces proper usage of these color symbolic constants**. We can still do something like this:

```c++
// syntactically valid, semantically meaningless
color_t eyeColor{ 8 }; 
```

**Also, if we debug any of these variables in our debugger, we’ll only see the integer value of the color (e.g. 0), not the symbolic meaning (red)**, which can make it harder to tell if our program is correct.

Fortunately, we can do even better.


## Enumerations

An **enumeration** (also called an **enumerated type** or an **enum**) is a compound data type where every possible value is defined as a symbolic constant (called an **enumerator**).

**Because enumerations are program-defined types** [9.13 -- Introduction to program-defined (user-defined) types](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-program-defined-user-defined-types/), **each enumeration needs to be defined before we can use it to create objects using that enumerated type**.

**C++ supports two kinds of enumerations:** unscoped enumerations (which we’ll cover now) and scoped enumerations (which we’ll cover later in this chapter).


## Unscoped enumerations

Unscoped enumerations are defined via the `enum` keyword.

Enumerated types are best taught by example, so let’s define an unscoped enumeration that can hold some color values. We’ll explain how it all works below.

```c++
// Define a new unscoped enumeration named Color.
enum Color {

    // Here are the enumerators.
    // These symbolic constants define 
    // all the possible values this type can hold.
    // Each enumerator is separated by a comma, not a semicolon.
    red,
    green,
    blue, // trailing comma optional but recommended

};  // The enum definition must end with a semicolon.

int main() {

    // Define a few variables of enumerated type Color.
    Color apple{ red };   // my apple is red
    Color shirt{ green }; // my shirt is green
    Color cup  { blue };  // my cup is blue

    // compile error! white is not an enumerator of Color.
    Color socks{ white };

    // compile error! 2 is not an enumerator of Color.
    Color hat{ 2 };
}
```

We start our example by using the `enum` keyword to tell the compiler that we are defining an unscoped enumeration, which we’ve named `Color`.

Inside a pair of curly braces, we define the enumerators for the `Color` type: `red`, `green`, and `blue`. **These enumerators specify the set of possible values that objects of type `Color` will be able to hold.** *Each enumerator must be separated by a comma (not a semicolon) -- a trailing comma after the last enumerator is optional but recommended for consistency.*

The type definition for `Color` ends with a semicolon. We’ve now fully defined what enumerated type `Color` is!

**Inside `main()`, we instantiate three variables of type `Color`:** `apple` is initialized with the color `red`, `shirt` is initialized with the color `green`, and `cup` is initialized with the color `blue`. **Memory is allocated for each of these objects.** **Note that the initializer for an enumerated type must be one of the defined enumerators for that type.** The variables `socks` and `hat` cause compile errors because the initializers `white` and `2` are not enumerators of `Color`.

>**A reminder**  
To quickly recap on nomenclature:  
- An enumeration or enumerated type is the program-defined type itself (e.g. `Color`)
- An enumerator is a symbolic constant that is a possible value for a given enumeration (e.g. `red`)


## Naming enumerations and enumerators

By convention, the names of enumerated types start with a capital letter (as do all program-defined types).

>**Warning**  
Enumerations don’t have to be named, but unnamed enumerations should be avoided in modern C++.

>>>  
```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <type_traits>

int main() {

    // X has a distinct (unnamed) type
    enum { X = 78 };

    // Y has a distinct (unnamed) type
    enum { Y = 79 };

    // X and Y are of two different types 
    std::cout << "X and Y are of the same type? " << std::boolalpha
        << std::is_same< decltype(X), decltype(Y) >::value << '\n';
    // "false"


    const auto ex{ X };
    auto ey{ Y };

    //// compile error!
    //// ex and ey are of different types 
    //// with no implicit conversion between them.
    //ey = ex; 

    //// compile error!
    //// no implicit conversion from int to type of ey.
    //ey = int(ex); 

    //// compile error!
    //// no implicit conversion from int to type of ey.
    //ey = 7; 


    using type_of_y = decltype(Y);

    // fine: explicit conversion with a cast
    ey = type_of_y(ex);

    // fine: explicit conversion with a cast
    ey = type_of_y(7);

    // fine: implicit conversion to the underlying type 'int'
    // g++: ** warning: (X==Y) comparison between unrelated enum types
    std::cout << ey << ' ' << (X == Y) << '\n';
}
```

*Enumerators must be given names.* **Unfortunately, there is no common naming convention for enumerator names.** Common choices include starting with lower case (e.g. `red`), starting with caps (`Red`), all caps (`RED`), all caps with a prefix (`COLOR_RED`), or prefixed with a “k” and intercapped (`kColorRed`).

**Modern C++ guidelines typically recommend avoiding the all caps naming conventions**, as all caps is typically used for preprocessor macros and may conflict. We recommend also avoiding the conventions starting with a capital letter, as names beginning with a capital letter are typically reserved for program-defined types.

>**Best practice**  
Name your enumerated types starting with a capital letter. Name your enumerators starting with a lower case letter.


## Enumerated types are distinct types

**Each enumerated type you create is considered to be a distinct type, *meaning the compiler can distinguish it from other types* (unlike typedefs or type aliases, which are considered non-distinct from the types they are aliasing).**

**Because enumerated types are distinct, enumerators defined as part of one enumerated type can’t be used with objects of another enumerated type:**

```c++
enum Pet { cat, dog, pig, whale, };

enum Color { black, red, blue, };

int main() {

    // compile error! black is not am enumerator of Pet.
    Pet myPet{ black };

    // compile error! pig is not an enumerator of Color.
    Color shirt{ pig };
}
```

You probably didn’t want a pig shirt anyway.


## Putting enumerations to use

Because enumerators are descriptive, they are useful for enhancing code documentation and readability. **Enumerated types are best used when you have a smallish set of related constants, and objects only need to hold one of those values at a time.**

Commonly defined enumerations include days of the week, the cardinal directions, and the suits in a deck of cards:

```c++
enum DaysOfWeek {
    sunday,
    monday,
    tuesday,
    wednesday,
    thursday,
    friday,
    saturday,
};

enum CardinalDirections {
    north,
    east,
    south,
    west,
};

enum CardSuits {
    clubs,
    diamonds,
    hearts,
    spades,
};
```

*Sometimes functions will return a status code to the caller to indicate whether the function executed successfully or encountered an error.* **Traditionally, small negative numbers were used to represent different possible error codes.** For example:

```c++
int readFileContents() {
    if (!openFile())    return -1;

    if (!readFile())    return -2;

    if (!parseFile())   return -3;

    return 0;           // success
}
```

However, using magic numbers like this isn’t very descriptive. **A better method would be to use an enumerated type:**

```c++
enum FileReadResult {
    readResultSuccess,
    readResultErrorFileOpen,
    readResultErrorFileRead,
    readResultErrorFileParse,
};

FileReadResult readFileContents() {
    if (!openFile())
        return readResultErrorFileOpen;
    if (!readFile())
        return readResultErrorFileRead;
    if (!parsefile())
        return readResultErrorFileParse;

    return readResultSuccess;
}
```

Then the caller can test the function’s return value against the appropriate enumerator, which is easier to understand than testing the return result for a specific integer value.

```c++
if (readFileContents() == readResultSuccess) {

    // Do something

} else {

    // Print error message.

}
```

*Enumerated types can also be put to good use in games, to identify different types of items, or monsters, or terrain types.* **Basically, anything that is a small set of related objects.**

For example:

```c++
enum ItemType { sword, torch, potion, };

int main() { ItemType holding{ torch }; }
```

*Enumerated types can also make for useful function parameters when the user needs to make a choice between two or more options:*

```c++
enum SortOrder {
    alphabetical,
    alphabeticalReverse,
    numerical,
};

void sortData(SortOrder order) {
    if (order == alphabetical) {

        // Sort data in forwards alphabetical order.

    } else if (order == alphabeticalReverse) {

        // Sort data in backwards alphabetical order.

    } else if (order == numerical) {

        // Sort data numerically.

    }
}
```

**Many languages use enumerations to define Booleans** -- after all, a Boolean is essentially just an enumeration with 2 enumerators: false and true! **However, in C++, true and false are defined as keywords instead of enumerators.**


## The scope of unscoped enumerations

**Unscoped enumerations are named such because they put their enumerator names into the same scope as the enumeration definition itself** (as opposed to creating a new scope region like a namespace does).

For example, given this program:

```c++
// blue is put into the global namespace.
enum Color { red, green, blue, };

// My apple is red.
int main() { Color apple{ red }; }
```

**The `Color` enumeration is defined in the global scope.** Therefore, all the enumeration names (`red`, `green`, and `blue`) also go into the global scope. *This pollutes the global scope and significantly raises the chance of naming collisions.*

**One consequence of this is that an enumerator name can’t be used in multiple enumerations within the same scope:**

```c++
// blue is put into the global namespace
enum Color { red, green, blue, };

// compile error! 
// Naming collision with the above blue.
enum Feeling { happy, tired, blue, };

int main() {

    // My apple is red.
    Color apple{ red };

    // I'm happy right now.
    // (even though my program doesn't compile).
    Feeling me{ happy };
}
```

In the above example, both unscoped enumerations (`Color` and `Feeling`) put enumerators with the same name blue into the global scope. **This leads to a naming collision and subsequent compile error.**

**Unscoped enumerations also provide a named scope region for their enumerators (much like a namespace acts as a named scope region for the names declared within).** This means we can access the enumerators of an unscoped enumeration as follows:

```c++
// blue is put into the global namespace.
enum Color { red, green, blue, };

int main() {

    // okay, accessing enumerator from global namespace.
    Color apple{ red };

    // also okay, accessing enumerator from scope of Color
    Color raspberry{ Color::red };
}
```

**Most often, unscoped enumerators are accessed without using the scope resolution operator.**


## Avoiding enumerator naming collisions

**There are quite a few common ways to prevent unscoped enumerator naming collisions.**

- *One option is to prefix each enumerator with the name of the enumeration itself:*

    ```c++
    enum Color {
        color_red,
        color_blue,
        color_green,
    };

    enum Feeling {
        feeling_happy,
        feeling_tired,

        // No longer has a naming collision with color_blue.
        feeling_blue,
    };

    int main() {
        Color paint{ color_blue };
        Feeling me{ feeling_blue };
    }
    ```

    **This still pollutes the namespace but reduces the chance for naming collisions** by making the names longer and more unique.

- *A better option is to put the enumerated type inside something that provides a separate scope region, such as a namespace:*

    ```c++
    namespace color {

        // The names Color, red, blue, and green
        // are defined inside namespace color.
        enum Color { red, green, blue, };
    }

    namespace feeling {

        // feeling::blue doesn't collide with color::blue
        enum Feeling { happy, tired, blue, };
    }

    int main() {
        color::Color paint{ color::blue };
        feeling::Feeling me{ feeling::blue };
    }
    ```

    *This means we now have to prefix our enumeration and enumerator names with the name of the scoped region.*

    >**For advanced readers**  
    Classes also provide a scope region, and it’s common to put enumerated types related to a class inside the scope region of the class. We discuss this in [lesson 12.17 -- Nested types in classes](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/nested-types-in-classes/).

    A related option is to use a scoped enumeration (which defines its own scope region). We’ll discuss scoped enumerations shortly ([9.16 -- Scoped enumerations (enum classes)](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/scoped-enumerations-enum-classes/)).

    >**Best practice**  
    Prefer putting your enumerations inside a named scope region (such as a namespace or class) so the enumerators don’t pollute the global namespace.


## Comparing against enumerators

**We can use the equality operators (`operator==` and `operator!=`) to test whether an enumeration has the value of a particular enumerator or not.**

```c++
#include <iostream>

enum Color { red, green, blue, };

int main() {
    Color shirt{ blue };

    if (shirt == blue)
        std::cout << "Your shirt is blue!";
    else
        std::cout << "Your shirt is not blue!";
    // "Your shirt is blue!
}
```

In the above example, we use an if-statement to test whether `shirt` is equal to the enumerator blue. This gives us a way to conditionalize our program’s behavior based on what enumerator our enumeration is holding.

We’ll make more use of this in the next lesson.