---
title : "02.06 — Forward declarations and definitions"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - function prototype

toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---


>**Best practice**  
When addressing compile errors in your programs, always resolve the first error produced first and then compile again.


A **forward declaration** allows us to tell the compiler about the existence of an identifier before actually defining the identifier.

To write a forward declaration for a function, we use a declaration statement called a **function prototype**. The function prototype consists of the function’s return type, name, parameters, but no function body (the curly braces and everything in between them), terminated with a semicolon.




>**Best practice**  
When defining function prototypes, keep the parameter names. You can easily create forward declarations by using copy/paste on your function declaration. Don’t forget the semicolon on the end.


## Forgetting the function body

New programmers often wonder what happens if they forward declare a function but do not define it.

The answer is: it depends. If a forward declaration is made, but the function is never called, the program will compile and run fine. However, if a forward declaration is made and the function is called, but the program never defines the function, the program will compile okay, but the linker will complain that it can’t resolve the function call.

Consider the following program:

```c++
#include <iostream>

// forward declaration of add() using function prototype
int add(int x, int y); 

int main() {
    std::cout << "The sum of 3 and 4 is: " << add(3, 4) << '\n';
}

// note: No definition for function add
```

In this program, we forward declare add, and we call add, but we never define add anywhere. When we try and compile this program, Visual Studio produces the following message:

```c++
Compiling...
add.cpp
Linking...
add.obj : error LNK2001: unresolved external symbol "int __cdecl add(int,int)" (?add@@YAHHH@Z)
add.exe : fatal error LNK1120: 1 unresolved externals
```

As you can see, the program compiled okay, but it failed at the link stage because `int add(int, int)` was never defined.


## Other types of forward declarations

Forward declarations are most often used with functions. However, forward declarations can also be used with other identifiers in C++, such as variables and user-defined types. Variables and user-defined types have a different syntax for forward declaration, so we’ll cover these in future lessons.


## Declarations vs. definitions

In C++, you’ll often hear the words “declaration” and “definition” used, often interchangeably. What do they mean? You now have enough of a framework to understand the difference between the two.

A definition actually implements (for functions or types) or instantiates (for variables) the identifier. Here are some examples of definitions:

```c++
int add(int x, int y) { // implements function add()
    int z{ x + y };     // instantiates variable z

    return z;
}
```

A definition is needed to satisfy the linker. If you use an identifier without providing a definition, the linker will error.

The one definition rule (or ODR for short) is a well-known rule in C++. The ODR has three parts:

Within a given file, a function, object, type, or template can only have one definition.
Within a given program, an object or normal function can only have one definition. This distinction is made because programs can have more than one file (we’ll cover this in the next lesson).
Types, templates, inline functions, and variables are allowed to have identical definitions in different files. We haven’t covered what most of these things are yet, so don’t worry about this for now -- we’ll bring it back up when it’s relevant.
Violating part 1 of the ODR will cause the compiler to issue a redefinition error. Violating ODR part 2 will likely cause the linker to issue a redefinition error. Violating ODR part 3 will cause undefined behavior.

Here’s an example of a violation of part 1:

```c++
int add(int x, int y) {
     return x + y;
}

// violation of ODR, we've already defined function add 
int add(int x, int y) {
     return x + y;
}

int main() {
    int x;
    int x; // violation of ODR, we've already defined x
}
```

Because the above program violates ODR part 1, this causes the Visual Studio compiler to issue the following compile errors:

```c++
project3.cpp(9): error C2084: function 'int add(int,int)' already has a body
project3.cpp(3): note: see previous definition of 'add'
project3.cpp(16): error C2086: 'int x': redefinition
project3.cpp(15): note: see declaration of 'x'
```

>**For advanced readers**  
Functions that share an identifier but have different parameters are considered to be distinct functions. We discuss this further in [lesson 8.9 -- Introduction to function overloading](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-function-overloading/)

A declaration is a statement that tells the compiler about the existence of an identifier and its type information. Here are some examples of declarations:

```c++
// tells the compiler about a function named "add"
// that takes two int parameters and returns an int. No body!
int add(int x, int y); 

// tells the compiler about an integer variable named x
int x; 
```

A declaration is all that is needed to satisfy the compiler. This is why we can use a forward declaration to tell the compiler about an identifier that isn’t actually defined until later.

In C++, all definitions also serve as declarations. This is why int x appears in our examples for both definitions and declarations. Since int x is a definition, it’s a declaration too. In most cases, a definition serves our purposes, as it satisfies both the compiler and linker. We only need to provide an explicit declaration when we want to use an identifier before it has been defined.

While it is true that all definitions are declarations, the converse is not true: all declarations are not definitions. An example of this is the function prototype -- it satisfies the compiler, but not the linker. These declarations that aren’t definitions are called pure declarations. Other types of pure declarations include forward declarations for variables and type declarations (you will encounter these in future lessons, no need to worry about them now).

The ODR doesn’t apply to pure declarations (it’s the one definition rule, not the one declaration rule), so you can have as many pure declarations for an identifier as you desire (although having more than one is redundant).



>**Author’s note**  
In common language, the term “declaration” is typically used to mean “a pure declaration”, and “definition” is used to mean “a definition that also serves as a declaration”. Thus, we’d typically call int x; a definition, even though it is both a definition and a declaration.