---
title : "10.17 — References and const"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - reference to const value
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---



## Reference to const value

Just like it’s possible to declare a pointer to a const value, it’s also possible to declare a **reference to a const value**. This is done by declaring a reference using the `const` keyword.

```c++
const int apples{ 5 };
const int& ref{ apples }; // ref is a reference to a const value
```

A reference to a const value is often called a **const reference** for short, though this does make for some inconsistent nomenclature with pointers.


## Initializing references to const values

Unlike references to non-const values, which can only be initialized with non-const l-values, **references to const values can be initialized with non-const l-values, const l-values, and r-values**.

```c++
int x{ 5 };
const int& ref1{ x }; // okay, x is a non-const l-value

const int y{ 7 };
const int& ref2{ y }; // okay, y is a const l-value

const int& ref3{ 6 }; // okay, 6 is an r-value
```

Much like a pointer to a const value, **a reference to a const value can reference a non-const variable**. When accessed through a reference to a const value, **the value is considered const** even if the original variable is not:

```c++
int apples{ 5 };
const int& ref{ apples }; // create const reference to variable apples

apples = 6; // okay, apples is non-const
ref = 7;    // illegal -- ref is const
```


## References to r-values extend the lifetime of the referenced value

**Normally r-values have expression scope, meaning the values are destroyed at the end of the expression in which they are created.**

```c++
// 2 + 3 evaluates to r-value 5, which is destroyed at the end of this statement
std::cout << 2 + 3 << '\n'; 
```

However, when a reference to a const value is initialized with an r-value, the lifetime of the r-value is extended to match the lifetime of the reference.

```c++
int somefcn() {
    // normally the result of 2+3 has expression scope and
    // is destroyed at the end of this statement
    const int& ref{ 2 + 3 }; 
    // but because the result is now bound to a reference to a const value...

    std::cout << ref << '\n';
    // we can use it here and
    // the lifetime of the r-value is extended to here,
    // when the const reference dies
}
```


## Const references as function parameters

References used as function parameters can also be `const`. **This allows us to access the argument without making a copy of it, while guaranteeing that the function will not change the value being referenced.**

```c++
// ref is a const reference to the argument passed in, not a copy
void changeN(const int& ref) {
	ref = 6; // not allowed, ref is const
}
```

**References to const values are particularly useful as function parameters because of their versatility.** A const reference parameter allows you to pass in a non-const l-value argument, a const l-value argument, a literal, or the result of an expression:

```c++
#include <iostream>

void printIt(const int& x) {
    std::cout << x;
}

int main() {
    int a{ 1 };
    printIt(a); // non-const l-value

    const int b{ 2 };
    printIt(b); // const l-value

    printIt(3); // literal r-value

    printIt(2+b); // expression r-value
}
```

**To avoid making unnecessary, potentially expensive copies, variables that are not pointers or fundamental data types (int, double, etc…) should be generally passed by (const) reference. Fundamental data types should be passed by value, unless the function needs to change them. There are a few exceptions to this rule, namely types that are so small that it’s faster for the CPU to copy them than having to perform an extra indirection for a reference.**

>**A reminder**  
References act like pointers. The compiler adds the indirection, which we’d do manually on a pointer using an asterisk, for us.

**One of those fast types is `std::string_view`.** You’ll learn about more exceptions later. If you’re uncertain if a non-fundamental type is fast to pass by value, pass it by const reference.

>**Best practice**  
Pass non-pointer, non-fundamental data type variables (such as structs) by (const) reference, unless you know that passing it by value is faster.


## Question #1

Which of the following types should be passed by value, which by const reference? You can assume the function that takes these types as parameters doesn’t modify them.

a) `char`         

b) `std::string`

c) `unsigned long`

d) `bool`

e) An enumerator

f) 

```c++
struct Position {
  double x{};
  double y{};
  double z{};
};
```

g)

```c++
struct Player {
  int health{};
  // The Player struct is still under development.
  // More members will be added.
};
```

h) `double`

i)

```c++
struct ArrayView {
  const int* array{};
  std::size_t length{};
};
```
**Hint: For reference, this is how we’d go about using `ArrayView`:**

```c++
#include <cstddef>  // std::size_t
#include <iostream>
#include <iterator> // std::size

struct ArrayView {
    const int* apples{};
    std::size_t length{};
};

void fn(/* ??? */ array) {
    for (std::size_t i{ 0 }; i < array.length; ++i)
        std::cout << array.apples[i] << ' ';
}

int main() {
    int array[3]{};

    fn({ array, std::size(array) });
}
```


a) `char` is a fundamental type, it should be passed by value.

b) `std::string` has to create a copy of the string whenever it is copied. Pass it by const reference.

c) `unsigned long` is a fundamental type, it should be passed by value.

d) `bool` is a fundamental type, it should be passed by value.

e) **Enumerators (Of enum and enum class) are named integers.** They are based on a fundamental type (Usually `int`) and should be passed by value.

***f) Position is a custom type and should be passed by const reference.***

g) Although Player only contains a single `int` in its current state, which would make it fast to pass by value, more members will be added in the future. We don’t want to update every use of Player when that happens, so we pass it by const reference.

h) `double` is a fundamental type, it should be passed by value.

i) `ArrayView` only has 2 member variables and no new members will be added in the future. The size of `ArrayView` will be usually be 16 bytes on 64 bit systems. Although this size isn’t ideal for the processor, it’s still faster to copy `ArrayView` than passing it by const reference. The type of the array doesn’t matter, because all pointers have the same size. **This is also how `std::string_view` works.** In that case, `ArrayView::array` would be a `const char*`. Passing `ArrayView` by const reference wouldn’t be wrong either, because if in doubt, const reference is the way to go.

>>>Fundamental types and cheap-to-copy classes (e.g. `std::string_view`, `std::unique_ptr`) are normally passed by value, whereas other classes are typically passed by const reference. What's cheap-to-copy isn't well defined (and varies by architecture), but a good rule of thumb is that objects up to 2 (or 3) pointers in size are better to pass by value, and anything bigger by const reference.