---
title : "04.13 — An introduction to std::string"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - string
    - C-style strings
    - std::cout
    - std::cin
    - std::string
    - std::getline()
    - output manipulator
    - input manipulator
    - std::ws
    - std::string::length()
    - std::literals::string_literals
    - constexpr std::string
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
last_modified_at: 2022-09-26
---

The very first C++ program you wrote probably looked something like this:

```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() { std::cout << "Hello, world!\n"; }
```

So what is `“Hello, world!”` exactly? `“Hello, world!”` is a collection of sequential characters called a **string**. In C++, we use strings to represent text such as names, addresses, words, and sentences. **String literals** (such as `“Hello, world!\n”`) are placed between double quotes to identify them as strings.

Because strings are commonly used in programs, most modern programming languages include a fundamental string data type. For historical reasons, strings are not a fundamental type in C++. Rather, they have a strange, complicated type that is hard to work with (we’ll cover how/why in a future lesson, once we’ve covered more fundamentals required to explain how they work). For now, we’ll call double-quoted strings “**C-style strings**”, as they were inherited from the C-language.

Fortunately, C++ has introduced two additional string types into the language that are much easier and safer to work with: `std::string` and `std::string_view` (`C++17`). Although `std::string` and `std::string_view` aren’t fundamental types, they’re straightforward and useful enough that we’ll introduce them here rather than wait until the chapter on compound types ([chapter 9](https://www.learncpp.com/#Chapter9)).


## Introducing std::string

The easiest way to work with strings and string objects in C++ is via the `std::string` type, which lives in the `<string>` header.

We can create objects of type std::string just like other objects:

```c++
#include <string>       // allows use of std::string

std::string myName{};   // empty string
```

Just like normal variables, you can initialize or assign values to strings as you would expect:

```c++
// Initialize myName with string literal "Alex".
std::string myName{ "Alex" }; 

// Assign variable myName the string literal "John"
myName = "John"; 
```

Note that strings can hold numbers as well:

```c++
// "45" is not the same as integer 45!
std::string myID{ "45" }; 
```

**In string form, numbers are treated as text, not numbers**, and thus they can not be manipulated as numbers (e.g. you can’t multiply them). *C++ will not automatically convert string numbers to integer or floating point values.*


## String output

**Strings can be output as expected using `std::cout`:**

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main() {
    std::string myName{ "Alex" };
    std::cout << "My name is: " << myName << '\n';
    // "My name is: Alex"
}
```

**Empty strings will print nothing:**

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main() {
    std::string empty{};
    std::cout << '[' << empty << ']';
    // "[]"
}
```


## String input with `std::cin`

Using strings with `std::cin` may yield some surprises! Consider the following example:

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main() {
    std::cout << "Enter your full name: ";
    std::string name{};

    // This won't work as expected
    // since std::cin breaks on whitespace.
    std::cin >> name; 

    std::cout << "Enter your age: ";
    std::string age{};
    std::cin >> age;

    std::cout << "Your name is " << name << " and your age is " << age << '\n';
}
```

Here’s the results from a sample run of this program:

```c++
Enter your full name: John Doe
Enter your age: Your name is John and your age is Doe
```

Hmmm, that isn’t right! What happened? **It turns out that when using `operator>>` to extract a string from `cin`, `operator>>` only returns characters up to the first whitespace it encounters.** Any other characters are left inside `std::cin`, waiting for the next extraction.

So when we used `operator>>` to extract a string into variable name, *only "John" was extracted, leaving " Doe" inside `std::cin`*. *When we then used `operator>>` to get variable age, it extracted "Doe"* instead of waiting for us to input an age. Then the program ends.


## Use `std::getline()` to input text

To read a full line of input into a string, you’re better off using the `std::getline()` function instead. `std::getline()` takes two parameters: the first is `std::cin`, and the second is your string variable.

>>> source [here](https://www.cplusplus.com/reference/string/string/getline/)  
(1) `istream& getline (istream&  is, string& str, char delim);`  
(1) `istream& getline (istream&& is, string& str, char delim);`  
(2) `istream& getline (istream&  is, string& str);`  
(2) `istream& getline (istream&& is, string& str);`  
**Get line from stream into string**  
Extracts characters from `is` and stores them into `str` until the delimitation character `delim` is found (or the newline character, `'\n'`, for (2)).

Here’s the same program as above using `std::getline()`:

```c++
#include <string>       // For std::string and std::getline
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    std::cout << "Enter your full name: ";
    std::string name{};

    // Read a full line of text into name.
    std::getline(std::cin >> std::ws, name);    

    std::cout << "Enter your age: ";
    std::string age{};

    // Read a full line of text into age.
    std::getline(std::cin >> std::ws, age);     

    std::cout << "Your name is " << name << " and your age is " << age << '\n';
}
```


## What the heck is `std::ws`?

In [lesson 4.8 -- Floating point numbers](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/floating-point-numbers/), we discussed **output manipulators**, which allow us to alter the way output is displayed. In that lesson, we used the output manipulator function `std::setprecision()` to change the number of digits of precision that `std::cout` displayed.

C++ also supports **input manipulators**, which alter the way that input is accepted. The **`std::ws`** input manipulator tells `std::cin` to ignore any leading [whitespace](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/whitespace-and-basic-formatting/).

>>> source [here](https://www.cplusplus.com/reference/istream/ws/)  
(for istream)    `istream& ws (istream& is);`  
(basic template) `template <class charT, class traits> basic_istream<charT,traits>& ws (basic_istream<charT,traits>& is);`  
**Extract whitespaces**  
Extracts as many whitespace characters as possible from the current position in the input sequence. The extraction stops as soon as a non-whitespace character is found. These extracted whitespace characters are discarded.

Let’s explore why this is useful. Consider the following program:

```c++
#include <string>
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    std::cout << "Pick 1 or 2: ";
    int choice{};
    std::cin >> choice;

    std::cout << "Now enter your name: ";
    std::string name{};

    // note: No std::ws here...
    std::getline(std::cin, name); 

    std::cout << "Hello, " << name << ", you picked " << choice << '\n';
}
```

Here’s some output from this program:

```
Pick 1 or 2: 2
Now enter your name: Hello, , you picked 2
```

This program first asks you to enter 1 or 2, and waits for you to do so. All good so far. Then it will ask you to enter your name. However, it won’t actually wait for you to enter your name! Instead, it prints the “Hello” string, and then exits. What happened?

When you enter a value using `operator>>`, `std::cin` not only captures the value, **it also captures the newline character (`'\n'`) that occurs when you hit the enter key**. So when we type 2 and then hit enter, `std::cin` gets the string "2\n". *It then extracts the 2 to variable choice, leaving the newline character behind for later. Then, when `std::getline()` goes to read the name, it sees "\n" is already in the stream, and figures we must have previously entered an empty string!* Definitely not what was intended.

We can amend the above program to use the `std::ws` input manipulator, to tell `std::getline()` to ignore any leading whitespace characters:

```c++
#include <string>
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    std::cout << "Pick 1 or 2: ";
    int choice{};
    std::cin >> choice;

    std::cout << "Now enter your name: ";
    std::string name{};

    // note: Added std::ws here...
    std::getline(std::cin >> std::ws, name);

    std::cout << "Hello, " << name << ", you picked " << choice << '\n';
}
```

>**Best practice**  
If using `std::getline` to read strings, use the `std::ws` input manipulator to ignore leading whitespace.

>**Key insight**  
**Using the extraction operator (`>>`) with `std::cin` ignores leading whitespace.**  
`std::getline` does not ignore leading whitespace unless you use input manipulator `std::ws`.


## String length

If we want to know how many characters are in a `std::string`, we can ask the `std::string` for its length. The syntax for doing this is different than you’ve seen before, but is pretty straightforward:

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main() {
    std::string myName{ "Alex" };
    std::cout << myName << " has " 
        << myName.length() << " characters\n";
    // "Alex has 4 characters"
}
```

Note that instead of asking for the string length as `length(myName)`, we say `myName.length()`. The `length()` function isn’t a normal standalone function -- **it’s a special type of function that is nested within `std::string` called a member function**. Because `length()` lives within `std::string`, *it is sometimes written as `std::string::length` in documentation*.

We’ll cover member functions, including how to write your own, in more detail later.

Also note that **`std::string::length()` returns an unsigned integral value (most likely `size_t`)**. If you want to assign the length to an `int` variable, you should `static_cast` it to avoid compiler warnings about signed/unsigned conversions:

```c++
int length{ static_cast<int>(myName.length()) };
```

**In `C++20`, you can also use the `std::ssize()` function to get the length of a `std::string` as a signed integer:**

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main() {
    std::string name{ "Alex" };
    std::cout << name << " has " << std::ssize(name) << " characters\n";
}
```


## std::string is expensive to initialize and copy

**Whenever a `std::string` is initialized, a copy of the string used to initialize it is made.** **And whenever a `std::string` is passed by value to a `std::string` parameter, another copy is made.** These copies are expensive, and should be avoided if possible.

>**Best practice**  
Do not pass `std::string` by value, as making copies of `std::string` is expensive. Prefer `std::string_view` parameters.

We’ll discuss this topic (and `std::string_view`) further in [lesson 4.18 -- Introduction to std::string_view](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-stdstring_view/).


## Literals for std::string

**Double-quoted string literals (like “Hello, world!”) are C-style strings by default (and thus, have a strange type).**

**We can create string literals with type `std::string` by using a s suffix after the double-quoted string literal.**

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>       // for std::string
#include <string_view>  // for std::string_view

int main() {

    // easiest way to access the s and sv suffixes
    using namespace std::literals; 

    std::cout << "foo\n";       // no suffix is a C-style string literal
    std::cout << "goo\n"s;      // s suffix is a std::string literal
    std::cout << "moo\n"sv;     // sv suffix is a std::string_view literal
};
```

>**Tip**  
The “s” suffix lives in the namespace `std::literals::string_literals`. The easiest way to access the literal suffixes is via using directive `using namespace std::literals`. We discuss using directives in [lesson 6.12 -- Using declarations and using directives](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/using-declarations-and-using-directives/). **This is one of the exception cases where using an entire namespace is okay**, because the suffixes defined within are unlikely to collide with any of your code.

You probably won’t need to use `std::string` literals very often (as it’s fine to initialize a `std::string` object with a C-style string literal), **but we’ll see a few cases in future lessons where using `std::string` literals instead of C-style string literals makes things easier.**

>>> ???


## Constexpr strings 

If you try to define a `constexpr std::string`, your compiler will probably generate an error:

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

using namespace std::literals;

int main()
{
    constexpr std::string name{ "Alex"s }; // compile error

    std::cout << "My name is: " << name;

    return 0;
}
```

**This happens because `constexpr std::string` isn’t supported in `C++17` or earlier, and only has minimal support in `C++20`.** **If you need constexpr strings, use `std::string_view` instead** (discussed in [lesson 4.18 -- Introduction to std::string_view](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-stdstring_view/).


## Conclusion

`std::string` is complex, leveraging many language features that we haven’t covered yet. Fortunately, you don’t need to understand these complexities to use `std::string` for simple tasks, like basic string input and output. We encourage you to start experimenting with strings now, and we’ll cover additional string capabilities later.


## Quiz time

- **Q.** Write a program that asks the user to enter their full name and their age. As output, tell the user the sum of their age and the number of letters in their name. For simplicity, count spaces in the name as a letter.

- **A.**  

    ```c++
    #include <iostream>
    #include <string>

    int main() {
        std::cout << "Enter your full name: ";
        std::string name{};
        // Read a full line of text into name.
        std::getline(std::cin >> std::ws, name);

        std::cout << "Enter your age: ";
        int age{};
        std::cin >> age;


        // age is signed, and name.length() is unsigned
        // -- we shouldn't mix these.
        // We'll convert name.length() to a signed value.
        // Get number of letters in name (including spaces).
        int letters{ static_cast<int>(name.length()) };
        std::cout << "Your age + length of name is: "
            << age + letters << '\n';
    }
    ```