---
permalink: /LearnCpp/
title : "20.09 — Exception specifications and noexcept"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---



**In C++, all functions are classified as either *non-throwing* (do not throw exceptions) or *potentially throwing* (may throw an exception).**

Consider the following function declaration:

```c++
// Can this function throw an exception or not?
int doSomething();  
```

*Looking at a typical function declaration, it is not possible to determine whether a function might throw an exception or not.* While comments may help enumerate whether a function throws exceptions or not (and if so, what kind of exceptions), documentation can grow stale and there is no compiler enforcement for comments.

**Exception specifications** are a language mechanism that was originally designed to document what kind of exceptions a function might throw as part of a function specification. While most of the exception specifications have now been deprecated or removed, *one useful exception specification was added as a replacement*, which we’ll cover in this lesson.


## The `noexcept` specifier

The **`noexcept`** specifier defines a function as non-throwing. **To define a function as non-throwing, we can use the `noexcept` specifier in the function declaration, placed to the right of the function parameter list:**

```c++
// This function is non-throwing.
void doSomething() noexcept; 
```

*Note that noexcept doesn’t actually prevent the function from throwing exceptions or calling other functions that are potentially throwing.* **Rather, when an exception is thrown, if an exception exits a noexcept function, `std::terminate` will be called.** ***And note that if `std::terminate` is called from inside a noexcept function, stack unwinding may or may not occur (depending on implementation and optimizations), which means your objects may or may not be destructed properly prior to termination.***

>>>TOO HARD...

Much like functions that differ only in their return values cannot be overloaded, **functions differing only in their exception specification can not be overloaded**.


## The `noexcept` specifier with a Boolean parameter

**The noexcept specifier has an optional Boolean parameter.** `noexcept(true)` is equivalent to noexcept, meaning the function is *non-throwing*. `noexcept(false)` means the function is *potentially throwing*. ***These parameters are typically only used in template functions, so that a template function can be dynamically created as non-throwing or potentially throwing based on some parameterized value.***

>>example...??


## Which functions are non-throwing and potentially-throwing

**Functions that are non-throwing by default:**

- default constructors
- copy constructors
- ***move constructors***
- destructors
- copy assignment operators
- move assignment operators

**However, if any of the listed functions call *(explicitly or implicitly)* another function which is potentially throwing, then the listed function will be treated as potentially throwing as well.** *For example, if a class has a data member with a potentially throwing constructor, then the class’s constructors will be treated as potentially throwing as well.* *As another example, if a copy assignment operator calls a potentially throwing assignment operator, then the copy assignment will be potentially throwing as well.*

>**Best practice**  
If you want any of the above listed functions to be non-throwing, explicitly tag them as noexcept (even though they are defaulted that way), to ensure they don’t inadvertently become potentially throwing.

**The following are potentially throwing by default:**

- Normal functions
- User-defined constructors
- Some operators, such as `new`

>>>**Types of constructor...**
**Default Constructor**: The constructor that accepts no parameters and reserves memory for an object is called default constructor. If no any constructor are explicitly defined then the compiler itself supplies a default constructor.  
**User defined constructor**: The constructor that accepts parameter to initialize the data members of an object are called user defined constructor. Programmer has to explicitly define such constructor in the program.  
**Copy Constructor**: Constructor having object reference as parameter is called copy constructor. A copy constructor when called, creates an object as an exact copy of another object in terms of its attribute. Copy constructor can be called by passing object as parameter or using assignment operator.


## The `noexcept` operator

**The noexcept operator can be used *inside functions*.** It takes an expression as an argument, and returns `true` or `false` if the compiler thinks it will throw an exception or not. **The noexcept operator is checked *statically at compile-time*, and doesn’t actually evaluate the input expression.**

>>>statically???

```c++
void foo() { throw -1; }
void boo() {};
void goo() noexcept {};
struct S{};

constexpr bool b1{ noexcept(5 + 3) };   // true; ints are non-throwing
constexpr bool b2{ noexcept(foo()) };   // false; foo() throws an exception
constexpr bool b3{ noexcept(boo()) };   // false; boo() is implicitly noexcept(false)
constexpr bool b4{ noexcept(goo()) };   // true; goo() is explicitly noexcept(true)
constexpr bool b5{ noexcept(S{}) };     // true; A struct's default constructor
                                        //       is noexcept by default.
```

**The noexcept operator can be used to conditionally execute code depending on whether it is potentially throwing or not.** This is required to fulfill certain exception safety guarantees, which we’ll talk about in the next section.


## Exception safety guarantees

An **exception safety guarantee** is a contractual guideline about how functions or classes will behave in the event an exception occurs. There are four levels of exception safety:

- **No guarantee** -- There are no guarantees about what will happen if an exception is thrown (e.g. a class may be left in an unusable state)

- **Basic guarantee** -- If an exception is thrown, no memory will be leaked and the object is still usable, but the program may be left in a modified state.

- **Strong guarantee** -- If an exception is thrown, no memory will be leaked and the program state will not be changed. This means the function must either completely succeed or have no side effects if it fails. *This is easy if the failure happens before anything is modified in the first place, but can also be achieved by rolling back any changes so the program is returned to the pre-failure state.*

- **No throw / No fail** -- The function will always succeed (**no-fail**) or fail without throwing an exception (**no-throw**).

Let’s look at the no-throw/no-fail guarantees is more detail:

***The no-throw guarantee***: if a function fails, then it won’t throw an exception. *Instead, it will return an error code or ignore the problem.* **No-throw guarantees are required during stack unwinding when an exception is already being handled;** *for example, all destructors should have a no-throw guarantee (as should any functions those destructors call).* Examples of code that should be no-throw:
- destructors and memory deallocation/cleanup functions
- functions that higher-level no-throw functions need to call

>>>**Higher-order functions** are functions that take functions as an argument.

>>>memory deallocation/cleanup functions... for what? the same reason for destructor??

***The no-fail guarantee***: a function will always succeed in what it tries to do *(and thus never has a need to throw an exception, thus, no-fail is a slightly stronger form of no-throw)*. Examples of code that should be no-fail:

- ***move constructors and move assignment (move semantics, covered in chapter M)***
- swap functions
- clear/erase/reset functions on containers
- ***operations on `std::unique_ptr` (also covered in chapter M)***
- functions that higher-level no-fail functions need to call

>>>...


## When to use noexcept

**Just because your code doesn’t explicitly throw any exceptions doesn’t mean you should start sprinkling noexcept around your code.** By default, most functions are potentially throwing, so if your function calls other functions, there is a good chance it calls a function that is potentially throwing, and thus is potentially throwing too.

**The standard library’s policy is to use noexcept only on functions that must not throw or fail.** Functions that are potentially throwing but do not actually throw exceptions (due to implementation) typically are not marked as noexcept.

>**Best practice**  
Use the noexcept specifier in specific cases where you want to express a no-fail or no-throw guarantee.

>**Best practice**  
If you are uncertain whether a function should have a no-fail/no-throw guarantee, err on the side of caution and do not mark it with noexcept. Reversing a decision to use noexcept violates an interface commitment to the user about the behavior of the function. Making guarantees stronger by retroactively adding noexcept is considered safe.

>>>???


## Why it’s useful to mark functions as non-throwing

There are a few good reasons to mark functions a non-throwing:

- Non-throwing functions can be safely called from functions that are not exception-safe, such as destructors
- Functions that are noexcept can enable the compiler to perform some optimizations that would not otherwise be available. Because a noexcept function cannot throw an exception outside the function, the compiler doesn’t have to worry about keeping the runtime stack in an unwindable state, which can allow it to produce faster code.
- There are also a few cases where knowing a function is noexcept allows us to produce more efficient implementations in our own code: the standard library containers (such as `std::vector`) are noexcept aware and will use the noexcept operator to determine whether to use move semantics (faster) or copy semantics (slower) in some places (we cover move semantics in chapter M).

>>>??


## Dynamic exception specifications

>**Optional reading**  
Before `C++11`, and until `C++17`, dynamic exception specifications were used in place of noexcept. The dynamic exception specifications syntax uses the throw keyword to list which exception types a function might directly or indirectly throw:  
```c++
// Does not throw exceptions.
int doSomething() throw(); 
//
// May throw either std::out_of_range or a pointer to an integer.
int doSomething() throw(std::out_of_range, int*); 
//
// May throw anything.
int doSomething() throw(...); 
```  
Due to factors such as incomplete compiler implementations, some incompatibility with template functions, common misunderstandings about how they worked, and the fact that the standard library mostly didn’t use them, the dynamic exception specifications were deprecated in `C++11` and removed from the language in `C++17` and `C++20`. See [this paper](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0003r0.html#2.0) for more context.
