---
title : "03.06 — Using an integrated debugger: Stepping"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---


When you run your program, execution begins at the top of the `main` function, and then proceeds sequentially statement by statement, until the program ends. At any point in time while your program is running, the program is keeping track of a lot of things: the value of the variables you’re using, which functions have been called (so that when those functions return, the program will know where to go back to), and the current point of execution within the program (so it knows which statement to execute next). All of this tracked information is called your **program state** (or just **state**, for short).

In previous lessons, we explored various ways to alter your code to help with debugging, including printing diagnostic information or using a logger. These are simple methods for examining the state of a program while it is running. Although these can be effective if used properly, they still have downsides: they require altering your code, which takes time and can introduce new bugs, and they clutter your code, making the existing code harder to understand.

Behind the techniques we’ve shown so far is an unstated assumption: that once we run the code, it will run to completion (only pausing to accept input) with no opportunity for us to intervene and inspect the results of the program at whatever point we want.

However, what if we were able to remove this assumption? Fortunately, most modern IDEs come with an integrated tool called a debugger that is designed to do exactly this.


## The debugger

A **debugger** is a computer program that allows the programmer to control how another program executes and examine the program state while that program is running. For example, the programmer can use a debugger to execute a program line by line, examining the value of variables along the way. By comparing the actual value of variables to what is expected, or watching the path of execution through the code, the debugger can help immensely in tracking down semantic (logic) errors.

The power behind the debugger is twofold: the ability to precisely control execution of the program, and the ability to view (and modify, if desired) the program’s state.

Early debuggers, such as gdb, were separate programs that had command-line interfaces, where the programmer had to type arcane commands to make them work. Later debuggers (such as early versions of Borland’s turbo debugger) were still standalone, but came with their own “graphical” front ends to make working with them easier. Most modern IDEs available these days have an integrated debugger -- that is, a debugger uses the same interface as the code editor, so you can debug using the same environment that you use to write your code (rather than having to switch programs).

Nearly all modern debuggers contain the same standard set of basic features -- however, there is little consistency in terms of how the menus to access these features are arranged, and even less consistency in the keyboard shortcuts.

>**Tip**  
Debugger keyboard shortcuts will only work if the IDE/integrated debugger is the active window.

The remainder of this chapter will be spent learning how to use the debugger.

>**Tip**  
Don’t neglect learning to use a debugger. As your programs get more complicated, the amount of time you spend learning to use the integrated debugger effectively will pale in comparison to amount of time you save finding and fixing issues.

>**Warning**  
Before proceeding with this lesson (and subsequent lessons related to using a debugger), make sure your project is compiled using a debug build configuration (see [0.9 -- Configuring your compiler: Build configurations](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/configuring-your-compiler-build-configurations/) for more information).  
If you’re compiling your project using a release configuration instead, the functionality of the debugger may not work correctly (e.g. when you try to step into your program, it will just run the program instead).


## Stepping

We’re going to start our exploration of the debugger by first examining some of the debugging tools that allow us to control the way a program executes.

**Stepping** is the name for a set of related debugger features that let us execute (step through) our code statement by statement.

There are a number of related stepping commands that we’ll cover in turn.


### - Step into

The **step into** command executes the next statement in the normal execution path of the program, and then pauses execution of the program so we can examine the program’s state using the debugger. If the statement being executed contains a function call, step into causes the program to jump to the top of the function being called, where it will pause.

>**For Visual Studio users**  
In Visual Studio, the step into command can be accessed via Debug menu > Step Into, or by pressing the F11 shortcut key.

When your program isn’t running and you execute the first debug command, you may see quite a few things happen:

- The program will recompile if needed.
- The program will begin to run. Because our application is a console program, a console output window should open. It will be empty because we haven’t output anything yet.
- Your IDE may open some diagnostic windows, which may have names such as “Diagnostic Tools”, “Call Stack”, and “Watch”. We’ll cover what some of these are later -- for now you can ignore them.

>**Warning**  
Because operator`<<` is implemented as a function, your IDE may step into the implementation of operator`<<` instead.  
If this happens, you’ll see your IDE open a new code file, and the arrow marker will move to the top of a function named operator`<<` (this is part of the standard library). Close the code file that just opened, then find and execute step out debug command (instructions are below under the “step out” section, if you need help).

>**Tip**  
In a prior lesson, we mentioned that `std::cout` is buffered, which means there may be a delay between when you ask `std::cout` to print a value, and when it actually does. Because of this, you may not see the value 5 appear at this point. To ensure that all output from `std::cout` is output immediately, you can add the following statement to the top of your `main()` function:  
```c++
// enable automatic flushing for std::cout (for debugging)
std::cout << std::unitbuf; 
```


### - Step over

Like step into, The **step over** command executes the next statement in the normal execution path of the program. However, whereas step into will enter function calls and execute them line by line, step over will execute an entire function without stopping and return control to you after the function has been executed.

>**For Visual Studio users**  
In Visual Studio, the step over command can be accessed via Debug menu > Step Over, or by pressing the F10 shortcut key.

The step over command provides a convenient way to skip functions when you are sure they already work or are not interested in debugging them right now.


### - Step out

Unlike the other two stepping commands, **Step out** does not just execute the next line of code. Instead, it executes all remaining code in the function currently being executed, and then returns control to you when the function has returned.

>**For Visual Studio users**  
In Visual Studio, the step out command can be accessed via Debug menu > Step Out, or by pressing the Shift-F11 shortcut combo.

This command is most useful when you’ve accidentally stepped into a function that you don’t want to debug.


### - A step too far

When stepping through a program, you can normally only step forward. It’s very easy to accidentally step past (overstep) the place you wanted to examine.

If you step past your intended destination, the usual thing to do is stop debugging and restart debugging again, being a little more careful not to pass your target this time.


### - Step back

Some debuggers (such as Visual Studio Enterprise Edition and GDB 7.0) have introduced a stepping capability generally referred to as **step back** or **reverse debugging**. The goal of a **step back** is to rewind the last step, so you can return the program to a prior state. This can be useful if you overstep, or if you want to re-examine a statement that just executed.

Implementing step back requires a great deal of sophistication on the part of the debugger (because it has to keep track of a separate program state for each step). Because of the complexity, this capability isn’t standardized yet, and varies by debugger. As of the time of writing (Jan 2019), neither Visual Studio Community edition nor the latest version of Code::Blocks support this capability. Hopefully at some point in the future, it will trickle down into these products and be available for wider use.
