---
title : "16.05 — Dependencies"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - dependency
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
last_modified_at: 2022-04-21
---

So far, we’ve explored 3 types of relationships: composition, aggregation, and association. We’ve saved the simplest one for last: dependencies.

In casual conversation, we use the term dependency to indicate that an object is reliant upon another object for a given task. For example, if you break your foot, you are dependent on crutches to get around (but not otherwise). Flowers are dependent upon bees to pollinate them, in order to grow fruit or propagate (but not otherwise).

A **dependency** occurs when one object invokes another object’s functionality in order to accomplish some specific task. **This is a weaker relationship than an association, but still, any change to object being depended upon may break functionality in the (dependent) caller.** A dependency is *always* a unidirectional relationship.

A good example of a dependency that you’ve already seen many times is `std::ostream`. Our classes that use `std::ostream` use it in order to accomplish the task of printing something to the console, but not otherwise.

For example:

```c++
#include <iostream>

class Point {
private:
    double m_x, m_y, m_z;

public:
    Point(double x = 0.0, double y = 0.0, double z = 0.0)
        : m_x(x), m_y(y), m_z(z) {}

    // Point has a dependency on std::ostream here.
    friend std::ostream& operator<< (std::ostream& out, const Point& point);
};

std::ostream& operator<< (std::ostream& out, const Point& point) {

    // Since operator<< is a friend of the Point class,
    // we can access Point's members directly.
    out << "Point(" << point.m_x << ", "
        << point.m_y << ", " << point.m_z << ")";

    return out;
}

int main() {
    Point point1(2.0, 3.0, 4.0);

    // The program has a dependency on std::cout here.
    std::cout << point1;
}
```

In the above code, `Point` isn’t directly related to `std::ostream`, but it has a dependency on `std::ostream` since `operator<<` uses `std::ostream` to print the `Point` to the console.


## Dependencies vs Association in C++

There’s typically some confusion about what differentiates a dependency from an association.

**In C++, associations are a relationship between two classes at the class level**. That is, *one class keeps a direct or indirect “link” to the associated class as a member*. For example, a `Doctor` class has an array of pointers to its `Patient`s as a member. You can always ask the `Doctor` who its `patient`s are. The `Driver` class holds the `id` of the `Car` the driver object owns as an integer member. The `Driver` always knows what `Car` is associated with it.

**Dependencies typically are *not* represented at the class level** -- *that is, the object being depended on is not linked as a member*. **Rather, the object being depended on is typically instantiated as needed (like opening a file to write data to), or passed into a function as a parameter (like `std::ostream` in the overloaded `operator<<` above).**

>>> MORE EXAMPLES...