---
title : "04.14 — Const, constexpr, and symbolic constants"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
published : false
---


## Const variables


## Const variables must be initialized


## Const function parameters

Const can also be used with function parameters:

```c++
#include <iostream>

void printInt(const int x) {
    std::cout << x;
}

int main() {
    printInt(5); // 5 will be used as the initializer for x
    printInt(6); // 6 will be used as the initializer for x
}
```

Making a function parameter const enlists the compiler’s help to ensure that the parameter’s value is not changed inside the function. Note that we did not provide an explicit initializer for our const parameter -- the value of the argument in the function call will be used as the initializer in this case.

When arguments are passed by value, we generally don’t care if the function changes the value of the parameter (since it’s just a copy that will be destroyed at the end of the function anyway). For this reason, we usually don’t const parameters passed by value. But later on, we’ll talk about other kinds of function parameters (where changing the value of the parameter will change the value of the argument passed in). For these other types of parameters, use of const is important.


## Runtime vs compile-time constants

C++ actually has two different kinds of constants.

**Runtime constants** are constants whose initialization values can only be resolved at runtime (when your program is running). The following are examples of runtime constants:

```c++
#include <iostream>

// x is a runtime constant
// because the value isn't known until the program is run 
void printInt(const int x) { 
    std::cout << x;
}

int main() {
    std::cout << "Enter your age: ";
    int age{};
    std::cin >> age;

    // usersAge is a runtime constant
    // because the value isn't known until the program is run
    const int usersAge { age }; 

    std::cout << "Your age is: ";
    printInt(age);
}
```

Variables such as `usersAge` and `x` in the above program above are runtime constants, because the compiler can’t determine their initial values until the program is actually run. `usersAge` relies on user input (which can only be given at runtime) and `x` depends on the value passed into the function (which is only known at runtime). However, once initialized, the value of these constants can’t be changed.

**Compile-time** constants are constants whose initialization values can be determined at compile-time (when your program is compiling). The following are examples of compile-time constants:

```c++
// the compiler knows at compile-time that gravity will have value 9.8
const double gravity { 9.8 }; 
// the compiler can resolve this at compiler time
const int something { 1 + 2 }; 
```

Compile-time constants enable the compiler to perform optimizations that aren’t available with runtime constants. For example, whenever gravity is used, the compiler can simply substitute the identifier gravity with the literal double 9.8.

When you declare a const variable, the compiler will implicitly keep track of whether it’s a runtime or compile-time constant. ***In most cases, this doesn’t matter, but there are a few odd cases where C++ requires a compile-time constant instead of a run-time constant (we’ll cover these cases later as we introduce those topics).***


## constexpr

To help provide more specificity, C++11 introduced the keyword **`constexpr`**, which ensures that a constant must be a compile-time constant:

```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    // ok, the value of 9.8 can be resolved at compile-time
    constexpr double gravity { 9.8 }; 
    // ok, the value of 4 + 5 can be resolved at compile-time
    constexpr int sum { 4 + 5 }; 

    std::cout << "Enter your age: ";
    int age{};
    std::cin >> age;
    // compile error: age is a runtime constant,
    // not a compile-time constant
    constexpr int myAge { age }; 
}
```



>**Best practice**  
Any variable that should not be modifiable after initialization and whose initializer is known at compile-time should be declared as constexpr.  
Any variable that should not be modifiable after initialization and whose initializer is not known at compile-time should be declared as const.


## Naming your const variables

Some programmers prefer to use all upper-case names for const variables. Others use normal variable names with a ‘k’ prefix. However, we will use normal variable naming conventions, which is more common. Const variables act exactly like normal variables in every case except that they can not be assigned to, so there’s no particular reason they need to be denoted as special.


## Symbolic constants

In the previous [lesson 4.13 -- Literals](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/literals/), we discussed “magic numbers”, which are literals used in a program to represent a constant value. Since magic numbers are bad, what should you do instead? The answer is: use symbolic constants! A **symbolic constant** is a name given to a constant literal value. There are two ways to declare symbolic constants in C++. One of them is good, and one of them is not. We’ll show you both.

## Bad: Using object-like macros with a substitution parameter as symbolic constants

```c++
#define MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS 30
int max_students { numClassrooms * MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS };
```

When you compile your code, the preprocessor replaces all instances of `MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS` with the literal value 30, which is then compiled into your executable.

You’ll likely agree that this is much more intuitive than using a magic number for a couple of reasons. `MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS` provides context for what the program is trying to do, even without a comment. Second, if the number of max students per classroom changes, we only need to change the value of `MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS` in one place, and all instances of `MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS` will be replaced by the new literal value at the next compilation.

Consider our second example, using #define symbolic constants:

```c++
#define MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS 30
#define MAX_NAME_LENGTH 30

int max_students { numClassrooms * MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS };
setMax(MAX_NAME_LENGTH);
```

In this case, it’s clear that `MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS` and `MAX_NAME_LENGTH` are intended to be independent values, even though they happen to share the same value (30). That way, if we need to update our classroom size, we won’t accidentally change the name length too.

So why not use #define to make symbolic constants? There are (at least) three major problems.

***First, because macros are resolved by the preprocessor, all occurrences of the macro are replaced with the defined value just prior to compilation.*** If you are debugging your code, you won’t see the actual value (e.g. 30) -- you’ll only see the name of the symbolic constant (e.g. `MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS`). And because these #defined values aren’t variables, you can’t add a watch in the debugger to see their values. If you want to know what value `MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS` resolves to, you’ll have to find the definition of `MAX_STUDENTS_PER_CLASS` (which could be in a different file). This can make your programs harder to debug.

Second, macros can conflict with normal code. For example:

```c++
#include "someheader.h"
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    int beta { 5 };
    std::cout << beta;
}
```

If `someheader.h` happened to #define a macro named beta, this simple program would break, as the preprocessor would replace the int variable beta’s name with whatever the macro’s value was.

Thirdly, macros don’t follow normal scoping rules, which means in rare cases a macro defined in one part of a program can conflict with code written in another part of the program that it wasn’t supposed to interact with.

>**Warning**  
Avoid using #define to create symbolic constants macros.


## A better solution: Use constexpr variables

A better way to create symbolic constants is through use of constexpr variables:

```c++
constexpr int maxStudentsPerClass { 30 };
constexpr int maxNameLength { 30 };
```

Because these are just normal variables, they are watchable in the debugger, have normal scoping, and avoid other weird behaviors.


>**Best practice**  
Use constexpr variables to provide a name and context for your magic numbers.


## Using symbolic constants throughout a multi-file program

In many applications, a given symbolic constant needs to be used throughout your code (not just in one location). These can include physics or mathematical constants that don’t change (e.g. pi or avogadro’s number), or application-specific “tuning” values (e.g. friction or gravity coefficients). Instead of redefining these every time they are needed, it’s better to declare them once in a central location and use them wherever needed. That way, if you ever need to change them, you only need to change them in one place.

There are multiple ways to facilitate this within C++ -- we cover this topic in full detail in [lesson 6.9 -- Sharing global constants across multiple files (using inline variables)](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/sharing-global-constants-across-multiple-files-using-inline-variables/).