---
title : "11.02 — Passing arguments by value"
category :
    - LearnCpp
tag : 
    - C++
    - https://www.learncpp.com/
    - passing argument by value
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
use_math : true
---


## Pass by value

**By default, non-pointer arguments in C++ are passed by value.** When an argument is **passed by value**, the argument’s value is copied into the value of the corresponding function parameter.

Consider the following snippet:

```c++
#include <iostream>

void foo(int y) {
    std::cout << "y = " << y << '\n';
}

int main() {
    foo(5);     // first call

    int x{ 6 };
    foo(x);     // second call
    foo(x + 1); // third call
}
```

*In the first call to `foo()`*, the argument is the literal `5`. When `foo()` is called, variable `y` is created, and the value of `5` is copied into `y`. Variable `y` is then destroyed when `foo()` ends.

*In the second call to `foo()`*, the argument is the variable `x`. `x` is evaluated to produce the value `6`. When `foo()` is called for the second time, variable `y` is created again, and the value of `6` is copied into `y`. Variable `y` is then destroyed when `foo()` ends.

*In the third call to `foo()`*, the argument is the expression `x+1`. `x+1` is evaluated to produce the value `7`, which is passed to variable `y`. Variable `y` is once again destroyed when `foo()` ends.

Thus, this program prints:

```
y = 5
y = 6
y = 7
```

**Because a copy of the argument is passed to the function, the original argument cannot be modified by the function.** This is shown in the following example:

```c++
#include <iostream>

void foo(int y) {
    std::cout << "y = " << y << '\n';

    y = 6;

    std::cout << "y = " << y << '\n';
} // y is destroyed here

int main() {
    int x{ 5 };
    std::cout << "x = " << x << '\n';

    foo(x);

    std::cout << "x = " << x << '\n';
}
```

This snippet outputs:

```
x = 5
y = 5
y = 6
x = 5
```

At the start of main, `x` is `5`. When `foo()` is called, the value of `x` (`5`) is passed to `foo`’s parameter `y`. Inside `foo()`, `y` is assigned the value of `6`, and then destroyed. The value of `x` is unchanged, even though `y` was changed.

Function parameters passed by value can also be made *`const`*. **This will enlist the compiler’s help in ensuring the function doesn’t try to change the parameter’s value.**


### Pros and cons of pass by value

**Advantages of passing by value:**

- Arguments passed by value can be variables (e.g. `x`), literals (e.g. `6`), expressions (e.g. `x + 1`), structs & classes, and enumerators. In other words, just about anything.
- Arguments are never changed by the function being called, which prevents side effects.

**Disadvantages of passing by value:**

- Copying structs and classes can incur a significant performance penalty, especially if the function is called many times.

**When to use pass by value:**

- When passing fundamental data types and enumerators, and the function does not need to change the argument.

**When not to use pass by value:**

- When passing structs or classes (including `std::array`, `std::vector`, and `std::string`).

In most cases, pass by value is the best way to accept parameters of fundamental types when the function does not need to change the argument. Pass by value is flexible and safe, and in the case of fundamental types, efficient.